24
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
Complete Transcript
JOHN: Hi. I’m John Sommers-Flanagan. 
RITA: And I’m Rita Sommers-Flanagan. And we’re really excited to 
welcome you to this DVD. 
JOHN: The DVD has clips from 11 different theory-based counseling 
sessions. On the one end, we begin with psychoanalytic theory, and 
on the other end, we finish with family systems approaches. And you 
know, Rita, one of the things I like the best about the DVD is that we 
feature real people with real problems. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. In fact, we involved six different professionals—of 
course two of those are us. But four colleagues joined us, and like you 
said, it’s real people with real problems. It’s not scripted. 
JOHN: And not being scripted means that mistakes were made and 
that no one on the DVD is perfect. 
RITA: Right. And of course, we can’t show you a whole theory in 
action. In fact, if you just dropped into a session somewhere in the 
United States at any time in any moment, you wouldn’t necessarily be 
able to tell what theory was involved in that session. In fact, I really 
like, John, how you’ve explained that to some of the students. 
JOHN: Right. I think one thing that helps is to notice that each 
theoretical perspective has a different listening focus. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: For example, if I’m doing the psychoanalytic work, I’m going 
to focus on different things while I’m listening than if I’m doing CBT 
or reality therapy. In addition, each theoretical model has different 
strategies and techniques that are linked to the model. And so in the 
DVD, we try to feature the listening focus as well as the strategies and 
techniques that go with each theoretical perspective. 
RITA: Right. The theoretical perspectives themselves have very basic 
beliefs that are different from each other, and, of course, result with 
different techniques and different strategies. But at the core, there 
are beliefs about the ways people change and the very essence of the 
25
Psychotherapy.net
meaning of life that drive the theories. And so sometimes you might 
see something going on that looks the same, but it’s actually coming 
from a very different place. 
JOHN: Right. It’s very complicated as you apply this to real situations. 
And we’re both counselors, and we’re dedicated to helping other 
counselors and psychotherapists become more effective in their work. 
And yet, I have to say, even in the process of doing this DVD, I felt 
humbled numerous times. And I felt that I continually learned. 
I learned from watching you do your sessions and from watching the 
other counselors and psychotherapists. I even learned from watching 
myself, which, as you know if you have done some video recording of 
yourself doing counseling or psychotherapy, it can be excruciatingly 
painful. But it’s a great way to learn and develop your counselling and 
psychotherapy skills. 
RITA: And we realize that this might be very bad news for some of 
you who are still in graduate school, working on gaining your basic 
skills. And you have that fantasy that you will graduate, you’ll get your 
license, and you’ll be the perfect counselor. 
JOHN: It’s really a lifelong journey, and we hope that this DVD helps 
you become a more effective counselor a or psychotherapist. 
RITA: This session is an example of psychoanalytic or psychodynamic 
therapy. 
JOHN: If i were to say one thing about the psychoanalytic perspective, 
it would be repetition—repetition of patterns. Whether you’re 
operating from the old fashioned Freudian perspective or the more 
modern attachment theory perspective, both of those perspectives 
emphasize that individuals develop an internal working model based 
on early childhood interactions. And that that model dictates, to some 
extent, that repeating pattern of the way people have relationships as 
well as certain kinds of conflicts or intrapsychic problems that are 
manifest over and over. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. And psychoanalytic is a very long therapy process 
usually, so of course it’s difficult to squeeze any of those concepts into 
a 20-minute session. John’s listening with Sarah for repeated themes, 
26
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
including the things she brings in, which is concern about blushing. 
JOHN: And what you’ll probably notice is that the listening 
that I do is fairly unstructured. It’s involving free association, or 
saying whatever comes to mind, which is one of the techniques 
that psychoanalytically-oriented therapists use. In addition, I will 
occasionally prompt her to explore the past to see if we can make some 
connections with how these particular problems, the blushing, first 
arose. 
RITA: Yeah. Your goal is to help Sarah begin to explore those repeated 
patterns in her life. 
JOHN: Absolutely. And as I do that, another thing to keep in mind 
is counter-transference, because counter-transference can distort the 
way I see Sarah’s problems. And that’s one of the reasons I think, from 
this perspective, it’s so important to go slowly, to work collaboratively 
with clients so we can make sure that my reactions or my distortions 
of her problem aren’t what’s guiding the session, and it’s really her 
issue and her problem. 
RITA: So let’s watch a few minutes of John working with Sarah. 
JOHN: So just start with the thought of your face blushing—maybe 
an image of it in your mind—and then just say whatever comes to 
mind. 
SARAH: Gosh. The words, I feel like, sound so harsh, but really I 
think of embarrassment, humiliation. I feel like I look stupid. Um, I—
yeah. Those kinds of things. 
JOHN: Yeah. Pretty harsh things. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: If you go back in time, starting now, but just go way back, 
as early as you can, can you think of humiliation, embarrassment 
experiences where you maybe first started having that kind of 
flushing? 
SARAH: You know, it probably was when I was in college. And there 
were people that would say oh my gosh, your face just turned red. And 
I actually had someone that I worked with that would say to me, oh, I 
27
Psychotherapy.net
just love to embarrass you and watch your face turn red. 
And I can remember that I hadn’t been that aware of it, but then there 
was just something that—it just started, you know, the awareness, I 
think. It just started happening more and more often. 
JOHN: Yeah. Back in college—it was an early time when you 
remember it. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Can you remember a particular time when you flushed and 
what was going on then? 
SARAH: When I was in high school and the teacher would ask a 
question, I would feel fine answering a question and speaking up. And 
when I got to college, I wouldn’t because I was afraid my face would 
turn red. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: So it’s just that, that I would be in class and I would feel 
like I had something to contribute, but I didn’t want to talk because 
I thought I would draw attention to myself with my face turning red, 
yeah. 
JOHN: What might you have said that would make your face turn 
red? 
SARAH: I don’t know. I wasn’t really worried about the content, but I 
think that just talking in the group, it’s just, I—I knew it would turn 
red, and the idea of it turning red, and people thinking, gosh, look 
how insecure she is that she can’t even talk without her face turning 
red. I just didn’t want to deal with it, so I sort of quit talking in class. 
Yeah. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
And so we started with what causes the flushing or the bushing. And 
it seemed like that was related to some things in college and people 
bringing that to your attention. And as you focused on it more and 
more, it seems to have gotten less and less in control. Would that be 
right? 
28
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Yeah. 
JOHN: And so now we’ve moved to talking about some safety 
concerns about your children mostly, but just tragedy striking you. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And again, it seems like, maybe in some ways, the more and 
more you try to control your worry thoughts, the less they feel in 
control. It kind of feels like they keep getting bigger and bigger. Is 
that—
SARAH: Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. They do. And I—you know, I have 
periods of time where I don’t feel this way, but—but, yeah. I have a lot 
of thoughts of just wanting to live like a normal person and not having 
all these thoughts all the time in my head. And I wonder, as we’re 
talking now, if I just kind of am living a little anxiously all the time, 
and that’s maybe affecting my—I don’t know. I mean, that’s what it 
feels like right now. 
JOHN: Yeah, it kind of sends along your anxiety. Something might go 
wrong. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Something bad might happen. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Something that could be a tragedy. And the first thing you 
think of is the car accident sort of thing, and what else? What other 
kinds of tragedies or just even small bad things might happen? 
SARAH: I don’t—I don’t worry about small things, honestly. I mean,  
I don’t. I feel like I’m pretty good about that. I don’t want—yeah. I can 
categorize things. Like, OK. With when my kids my kids play really 
rough a lot, and I think, well, that would just be a broken limb. So we 
can—that—go ahead.  
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: But when it starts to be, well, that could be a big head injury, 
then—you know? And I think of all that. I mean, I go through the 
whole checklist in my head a lot. And I don’t feel like, do other people 
29
Psychotherapy.net
do that? I mean, I don’t know. I’m always questioning. Like, is this 
crazy to be just constantly having this in my head? And I think it to 
my kids that I hope that I appear completely calm.  That’s how I want 
to appear, because I don’t want to put this on them, but. 
JOHN: You’d like to have it in your head less—whether other people 
are crazy or whether it’s crazy or not, you’d like to have it in your head 
less. 
SARAH: For sure. For sure. Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Yeah. And what kinds of things have you tried? 
SARAH: Well, I always think about whenever I’m challenged with 
something, I always think about the worst-case scenario. And I believe 
completely that I can handle anything—anything, and I’ve gone 
through this whole list. Like if I lost my limbs or whatever,  I could 
handle anything. But I can’t handle something happening to my kids. 
JOHN: Uh huh. 
SARAH: And that—I just—so when I try to approach this logically 
and think, well, so-and-so has made it through life without a big thing 
happening, and so-and-so—I mean, people just have a lot of tragedy. 
And so I just come back to that, and—
JOHN: And feel that underlying nervousness. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Yeah. Yeah. And yet, if we go back to the blushing, that’s 
not a bad thing happening. Speaking up in class? Not a bad thing 
happening. And yet that feels kind of out of control, too. 
SARAH: It does, because I really hate to be perceived as stupid. 
JOHN: Mmm. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. And that’s kind of a thing that goes way back for 
me too. When I was younger, I had this persona that developed that 
I was an airhead, and I’ve had to work so hard to kind of—because I 
think I used it for a while to my advantage, and then in college again I 
had to work so hard to get rid of that whole image. And it still is kind 
of in there somewhere, I think. 
30
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: You still sort of have some fear of being perceived as an 
airhead. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Wanting to prove that you, in fact, are not. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And you used the word stupid. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Go with that. 
SARAH: I don’t know. I just, I really value intelligence, I guess. I value 
it a lot in other people. And I, I don’t know. I just, I hate that I let 
myself have that persona for so long. It’s just, it really bugs me. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: I feel like I could have done other things with my life if I 
hadn’t gone without it so much. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. What’s going on to make that seem like a good 
thing then? 
SARAH: Oh, I don’t know. I don’t know. I mean, people gave me 
attention and laughed, and I don’t know. 
JOHN: What kinds of things did you do? 
SARAH: You know, I said some silly things like—this is in seventh 
grade. But still when I see these people, they’ll bring it up. 
JOHN: What did you say in seventh grade? 
SARAH: Oh gosh, really? 
JOHN: Ahh. 
SARAH:  There was something about a pen that had a calculator in it, 
and the battery died on the calc—or the—maybe it had a digital clock 
in it, and the battery died. And I didn’t think the pen would work 
anymore because the battery died. And, uh, it was just a split moment 
thing, but everyone laughed and thought it was hilarious. 
And I think that’s kind of when it started. And so people still, 30 years 
31
Psychotherapy.net
later, so, do you have a pen, Sarah?
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: And I can laugh. I mean, I am totally fine laughing at myself. 
That’s not the problem. It’s just, I just don’t want that identity that I’m 
dumb. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And you kept it for a while. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Like a long time. 
JOHN: Yeah. What are some other examples of—
SARAH: Mmm. Really? Another one that comes to mind is someone 
told me that their aunt had had a miscarriage, and I asked her if the 
baby was all right. 
JOHN: Uh huh. 
SARAH: So, you know? Because I just wasn’t—I knew—I don’t know 
what. That was just a dumb thing to say. I didn’t mean to say that, and 
so that’s another thing people bring up 30 years later. 
JOHN: Uh huh. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And that doesn’t sound intentional. 
SARAH: It wasn’t. 
JOHN: The pen and the miscarriage comment. 
SARAH: No. 
JOHN: And yet one of the things I kind of hear you saying is, well, 
that’s embarrassing. But it’s even maybe more embarrassing that you 
kind of took on that identity? 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Rita, while I was watching the clip of Sarah, one thing that I 
noticed was that kind of repeating or recycling pattern where, initially 
when she was asked about the blushing, she went back to a college 
experience. Later, she goes back to a high school experience, and later 
she goes back to a seventh grade experience. 
32
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
And what that reminds me of is how maybe resistance has diminished 
over time. Maybe trust is built. Either way, it seems like from 
this model, you look at things in the past. You uncover different 
perspectives each time. 
RITA: Yeah. One thing I noticed during this session is you asked 
her what she had done before, which can kind of sound behavioral, 
actually. 
JOHN: Right. It might also sound solution-focused. But the reason 
for asking that is to really sort of glimpse or study her pattern of 
trying to resolve the problem herself, because that’s important to the 
psychodynamics. And you know, in addition, I felt the impulse at one 
point. Like maybe I should have asked her, what do you think I think 
of you, which would be a question that’s very psychoanalytic, because 
it kind of pulls for the transference that might be happening in the 
session between Sarah and me. 
RITA: Which maybe would have worked, or maybe would have been a 
little early for that kind of reflection. 
JOHN: Absolutely. 
RITA: Yeah. So the next clip picks up right where we left off. 
JOHN: Exactly. So let’s watch. 
JOHN: But it’s even many more embarrassing that you kind of took on 
that identity. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Or did you take it on, people put it on you? 
SARAH: I think people put it on me after that, and then I went with it 
after that. Those are the two things that I really remember saying that 
were the worst. And then after that, I just kinda went with it. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And did you ever intentionally say things that 
were—
SARAH: Oh, probably. I mean, I really don’t remember other things, 
but I probably did act the part for a while, yeah. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
33
Psychotherapy.net
SARAH:  
JOHN: As you talk about it, it seems very—not really unsettling, but 
just like you kind of—
SARAH: Yeah. It makes me cringe. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: How about even before seventh grade? Anything where you 
felt like you were perceived as stupid? 
SARAH: Nuh uh. No. I was—actually, I was pretty smart.  
JOHN: Uh huh. 
SARAH: Really. So, no. It was kind of a middle school thing. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And somehow you carry on this sort of remnant 
from middle school that people might see you as stupid. And that 
carried into college, and even now you feel that the blushing might be 
related to that—
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: —thought of I’ll be caught—maybe I’ll be caught looking 
stupid. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Yup. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And the theme with your children is maybe I’ll 
be caught unprepared, maybe tragedy will strike because I’m not 
prepared? 
SARAH: Well, when you say that, it makes me think that, yeah, what 
if I—what if I wasn’t worried? Would that make the odds go up that 
something could happen? 
JOHN: What if I wasn’t worried about tragedy? What if I wasn’t 
worried about being viewed as stupid or unprepared? 
SARAH: Well, when I’m thinking about the tragedy part, I mean, 
what if I let that go and I just, it wasn’t on my mind all the time? Then 
maybe that would make the odds of it happening go up. 
34
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: I don’t know. It sounds ridiculous when I say, but—
JOHN: Yeah, yeah. But you hear this sort of belief in your mind—
maybe worrying about the tragedy helps prevent it. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Yep. I think that somehow that’s what I think. 
JOHN: And that that prevents it, even in the absence of any specific 
precautions. I mean, is it possible to take the precautions and then—
SARAH: Let it go? 
JOHN: Let it go? 
SARAH: I don’t know. 
JOHN: It seems like there are some things that are outside of your 
control. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Yeah. I don’t know. It feels like if I let it go, then 
what does that mean? 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: I don’t know. 
JOHN: What does it mean? 
SARAH: It just, it feels a little bit like, now am I being careless if I just 
let it go? And what comes to my head is do I love them less if I just let 
it go? Which sounds really weird, but—I don’t know. It feels scary to 
let it go, I guess. But I want to let it go. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. It would be nice to let it go. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: But somehow there’s a little superstition in your head that, if 
I let this go, maybe the odds will be worse, and maybe it’s a sign that I 
don’t really love them? That worrying about people is a loving thing? 
SARAH: Yeah, I guess so. I have not thought of it like that, but that’s 
sort of how it feels like. Um, yeah. It feels that way.  I mean, it feels 
so—it sounds so illogical, but that’s how it feels right now. 
JOHN: But that—that sort of feels—and when you just go with that, 
35
Psychotherapy.net
that thought if I worry, then it’s love. It’s a sign of love. Where do your 
thoughts go about worry? 
SARAH: Well first, I feel like my love for them is so much more than 
worry. So I don’t equate worry with love. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: But if I were to just let things go, I perceive other people 
having more normal thought in their head, and if perceive like, just 
letting my kids get in a car and just go somewhere and let it go—I do. I 
let them go in cars—I mean, I do. It’s just hard for me. And to imagine 
myself doing it without having the worry in my head, I don’t know—it 
feels careless. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And what does careless mean? 
SARAH: Then I feel a little bit—I think of being negligent, and then I 
think, and that’s when it’ll happen. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Carelessness is negligence. Just keep talking 
about—just talk your thoughts, even as we sit here, whatever comes. 
SARAH: I just feel like I’m in this, I’m stuck. Like I want to stop 
worrying. I want to live, and not live with all this fear. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: But I feel like I’m bound to it. And I’m just stuck all the time. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: And I want to be able to think about other things, and not 
be thinking about what kind of car my friend’s mom drives, and is 
she going to text or talk on the phone while she’s driving my kid, and 
what about the other person, and my husband, and—you know. And, 
I mean, crazy things. Like I sometimes will, without anyone knowing 
it—because I think I read that being on the left is more dangerous. So 
I’ll switch and make sure they evenly ride on the left and right, and if 
I put one of them on a safer side, does that mean I love him—I mean, 
the thoughts are crazy. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Yeah. 
SARAH: Yeah. It’s embarrassing when I hear myself even have these 
36
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
thoughts out loud. 
JOHN: It kind of makes you blush. 
SARAH: Yeah, I know.  I feel like I keep this part like, most—I try not 
to let people know about it, because I know that it’s kind of crazy. And 
I don’t—again, I don’t want to put it on my kids. I don’t want them to 
have to live with that. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH:  
JOHN: You spend a lot of time really protecting people. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Like protecting them from knowing that I—
JOHN: Protecting them knowing, protecting them from tragedy, 
worrying about lots of different people who you love. Who protects 
you? 
SARAH: Just me. I mean,  I do. I—my mom was always a little bit like 
this, so I do blame some of this on her.  
JOHN:  
SARAH: So I—
JOHN: Talk about how she did—how did she do it? 
SARAH: Oh, she just always was worried, and I’ve been really mad 
at her in the last few years because she’ll bring up some concern, and 
I’m like, if I haven’t thought of that concern yet, I certainly don’t need 
to hear it from you, because I’ve thought of every concern. So I’ve 
told her, you have to stop putting your worry on me, because I’ve got 
enough. And I’ve been really clear that I don’t want to live that way. 
She thinks that I am way more this way than she was. I don’t know if 
that’s true. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SARAH: But. 
JOHN: So some of it you feel like you’ve gotten from your mom over 
the years, and that she was a little bit like this. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. 
37
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: You’re not sure—maybe she’s even more than you or less than 
you. 
SARAH: I don’t think she tried to hide it from us. 
JOHN: Ah. She just sort of explicitly worried about your safety. 
SARAH: Mm-hmm. Yeah. 
JOHN: You and your siblings? 
SARAH: My sister and my brother. Mm-hmm. Yeah. I don’t think she 
tried to hide it from us. I am really determined that my kids will live a 
fun life. 
JOHN: You’ll not only protect them from tragedy, but you’ll protect 
them from their perception of you worrying too much. 
SARAH: Right. Right. 
JOHN: You know, Rita, as I watched myself working with Sarah, one 
thing I noticed is I didn’t really do any formal interpretations. And 
really what I was doing was prompting her to look at her past, trying 
to notice what patterns might come up. And I think in a lot of ways, 
that might be more appropriate than jumping in there with deeper 
interpretations. 
RITA: Right, especially at this stage. But the interesting thing is I 
think Sarah actually had some insight. And you could kind of feel that 
in the tape as you watched. 
JOHN: Right 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: She was working away. And I did notice that toward the end, 
Rita—
RITA: The mother came up. 
JOHN: And Freud would be very happy that that occurred. 
RITA: Yeah. In historic analytic work, all roads lead to the mother. 
JOHN: But in reality, we know that it’s not just the mother, it’s the 
mother and the father—the caretakers, other significant people in the 
person’s life—that somehow shaped that internal working model that 
38
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
eventually causes some issues or difficulties to repeat themselves. And 
I guess in closing, I just would like to say that Sarah was a fabulous 
client, and that I think she has the potential for lots of insight that 
might help her work through some of the issues that she presented in 
the session. 
RITA: Absolutely. 
This session is an example of using an Adlerian approach. John’s 
working with a 10-year-old boy named Clayton. 
JOHN: If I were to say just one thing about Adlerian therapy, it 
would be that it’s highly practical. And I think that might be one of 
the reasons why so many contemporary theories have borrowed and 
stolen from Adler, often without even giving him any credit. 
RITA: Right. 
JOHN: Adlerian therapy is also seen as a precursor to modern 
cognitive therapy. And one of the reasons for that is because of Adler’s 
concept called the Style of Life, or lifestyle. And that concept really 
is about how an individual develops beliefs about himself for herself, 
about others, and about the world. And that those beliefs guide the 
person as the person has to deal with different tasks of life. And so 
that’s very similar to the cognitive perspective of the schema. And so 
that’s one of the ways that Adler really was foreshadowing cognitive 
theory in therapy. 
RITA: That’s right. You know, Adlerian therapists are always very 
interested and very involved. They have an educational approach, 
which is oriented toward helping clients begin to understand what 
Adlerians call basic mistakes. 
JOHN: In the upcoming clip, one of the things that I’m doing is a 
family constellation interview—that’s the main focus. And sometimes 
I worry a little bit, in the session with Clayton, that I stuck a little too 
close to the clipboard and missed some chances to interact with him a 
little bit more spontaneously. But I did notice that a lot of those birth 
order characteristics that Adler talked about so much come out in the 
session, and so let’s watch. 
RITA: OK. 
39
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: So Clayton, we don’t know each other very well. 
CLAYTON: No.  
JOHN: So I want you to know any time if you want to ask me 
anything about me, you can. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: You don’t have to, though. 
CLAYTON: OK.  
JOHN: OK? But I’m going to ask you quite a few questions. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: About you. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: And a little bit about your family. 
CLAYTON: All right. 
JOHN: And one of the things that I like to do to help me get to know 
you a little bit better is to draw a family tree. And so I’m going to do 
that now. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: And I know a little bit about your family. And so I’m going 
to start here. This is going to be your dad, OK? He’s going to be big 
square. I’m going to go over here, and then your mom is going to be a 
big circle. And are you the oldest? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: All right. And you’re going to be square. And so we put 
Clayton here. And how old are you? 
CLAYTON: 10. 
JOHN: 10. 
And then you have a brother, right? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And how old is he? 
40
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
CLAYTON: Seven. 
JOHN: He’s seven. And what’s his name? 
CLAYTON: Carter. 
JOHN: Carter. And your mom’s name? 
CLAYTON: Sara. 
JOHN: Sara with no H, right? 
CLAYTON: No. 
JOHN: How old is she? 
CLAYTON: 42 I think. 
JOHN: 42 you think? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: I’ll put a question mark there because we’re not sure. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: And then your dad’s name? 
CLAYTON: Dave. 
JOHN: Dave. And how old is your dad? 
CLAYTON: I think 45. 
JOHN: OK. But we’ll put a question mark there, because we’re not 
exactly sure. OK. And that’s it? Anybody else live in your house? 
CLAYTON: Pets. 
JOHN: Oh, you have some pets? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: What do you have? 
CLAYTON: Two rabbits and a frog. 
JOHN: Whoa. I don’t know if I can make very good rabbits, but here’s 
a rabbit. Here’s another rabbit. And I know I can’t make a good frog, 
but—it sounds like you have a lot of things that jump. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
41
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: What are the rabbits’ names? 
CLAYTON: Rex and Scaper. 
JOHN: Rex and Scaper. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And the frog? 
CLAYTON: I don’t know his name. My brother never told me. 
JOHN: It’s your brother’s frog. 
CLAYTON: Yeah, and he never told me its name, so. 
JOHN: Mmm. OK. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. He doesn’t really tell anybody it’s name.  
JOHN: All right. So that’s really who hangs out in your house, for the 
most part. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And then if you go up, do you have some grandparents, too? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: So on your dad’s side. 
CLAYTON: His mom’s name is Donna. 
JOHN: OK. 
CLAYTON: And I don’t know his dad’s name, because I never met 
him, so. And then on my mom’s side, my grandma’s, which is Kay, um, 
and then my grandpa’s name’s Manny. 
JOHN: Manny? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. And so if you were to see this whole scene—and do you 
have, ah, you probably have some cousins, too, don’t you? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: It’s going to complicated. So where do we start? 
CLAYTON: I don’t—
42
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Your mom has—
A brother and a sister. Is that right? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. So, older or younger than her? Do you know? 
CLAYTON: They’re both younger. 
JOHN: So they—that’s it. So you have those two. We’ll say one is a boy 
and one’s a girl, or? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. And then they have kids? 
CLAYTON: My aunt doesn’t, but my uncle does. 
JOHN: How many kids? 
CLAYTON: Two. 
JOHN: So he’s got two kids. And how old are they? 
CLAYTON: Three and one. 
JOHN: Ah. So they’re pretty young. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Boy, girl? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: One of each? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. So three and one. And then on this side? 
CLAYTON: So my dad—I think he has two siblings with children, 
and mmm—actually, all three of his siblings have children. So one has 
two teenagers who are like 15 and 17. 
JOHN: OK. So there’s one that’s 15 and one that’s 17. 
CLAYTON: And then his other sister has but one, kid that’s nine, I 
think. Yeah, nine. 
JOHN: [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. Is that a boy or a girl? 
43
Psychotherapy.net
CLAYTON: Boy. 
JOHN: OK. So, nine. 
CLAYTON: And, then another one has, one boy who, I think he’s 
around five. 
JOHN: OK. 
CLAYTON: So, yeah. 
JOHN: So you’ve got two teenage cousins, a nine-year-old cousin, 
a five-year-old cousin, a three-year-old cousin, and a one-year-old 
cousin. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. Out of all these people, including your aunts and uncles, 
cousins, grandparents, parents, and brother, who would you say you’re 
closest to? Who do you hang out with the most? 
CLAYTON: Well if you call fighting hanging out, my brother. 
JOHN:  So you guys fight a little bit? We’ll put a little squiggly line 
here, kind of meaning that sometimes you guys fight. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. Probably my mom or dad. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. So both. You’re pretty close to your mom, you’re 
pretty close to your dad. 
CLAYTON: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: OK. And then would you say—I was going to ask what do you 
fight with the most. 
CLAYTON:  My brother, for sure. 
JOHN: Yeah. So that’s—we’ll put a little fighting there. And then who 
would you say is—who do you think is the best athlete? Who’s the best 
sporty person in all of these people? 
CLAYTON: Either me or one of my cousins—one of the teenage 
cousins. 
JOHN: So you’re pretty sporty, and maybe somebody over here, too. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
44
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Who is the best at music? 
CLAYTON:  I don’t know. 
JOHN: You don’t know. Who’s the best at art and like, drawing, and 
artsy things. 
CLAYTON: Probably Donna. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. So she’s kind of artsy. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: I can put that down—artsy. Who’s the most angry? 
CLAYTON: Like who’s mad a lot? 
JOHN: Yeah. Who gets mad a lot? 
CLAYTON: My brother. 
JOHN: You think your brother gets mad a lot. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. For sure. 
JOHN: Who gets in trouble the most? 
CLAYTON: My brother. Yeah. 
JOHN: No doubt about it. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. If you had three words that you could use to describe your 
dad, what words would you use? 
CLAYTON: Gone. 
JOHN: Gone? 
CLAYTON: Yeah, like he’s left town. Busy. And, I don’t know really 
the third one. 
JOHN: That’s OK. We’ve got two—gone and busy. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And three words to describe your mom. 
CLAYTON: School. 
JOHN: What was that? 
45
Psychotherapy.net
CLAYTON: She’s in school a lot. 
JOHN: School. She’s in school. I thought you said screwl. 
[LAUGHTER] 
CLAYTON: She’s also busy with homework. 
JOHN: So she’s busy. 
CLAYTON: And I’d say that she’s kind of slow at times, like 
sometimes it takes her a while to figure something out. 
JOHN: So she’s a little slow. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: It takes her a while to figure things out. Now, how about your 
brother—three words to describe your brother. 
CLAYTON: Noisy. 
JOHN: OK. 
CLAYTON: Tattletales. 
JOHN: Tattletale. 
CLAYTON: Likes baseball. He likes baseball. 
JOHN: OK. OK. And then the hardest one of all—three words to 
describe Clayton. 
CLAYTON: I like football and hockey, and, I enjoy eating.  
JOHN: You really like to eat, huh? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: I should have brought some snacks. 
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: What’s your favorite thing to have for a snack, like? What do 
you like to eat? 
Just everything? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. I don’t get a lot of very, like, sugary food, because 
my mom doesn’t really ever buy it. But, yeah. 
46
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Yeah. Can’t think of a favorite right now? 
CLAYTON: No. 
JOHN: So now, if you were to say, well, what are the—you know like 
your parents try to teach you things. What would you say are the 
lessons that they try to teach you? What do they try to teach you? 
What are their family values, the things that they believe in? 
CLAYTON: Probably not being allowed at other people’s houses, like 
when their parents are trying to do something, or, yeah. And just like, 
polite, I guess. 
JOHN: Be polite. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: So like, don’t bug other people in their houses when they don’t 
want you. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And be polite. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. Anything else that your parents really believe in? 
CLAYTON: Not off the top of my head. 
JOHN: OK. Those are the main ones. If you think of some later, that’s 
fine. 
So one thing I just think of when I see all this is that other than Taylor, 
you’re kind of the—I mean, I guess your brother is kind of close to 
your age. But you’re the only one who’s 10 right now. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And, in fact, nobody’s really very close. And Taylor, though, 
he’s close to you, but he lives in Great Falls. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Do you and Taylor get along OK? 
CLAYTON: I—he’s only a couple months younger than me. 
JOHN: Ah, so you guys play together OK? 
47
Psychotherapy.net
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And get along. And it sounds like you and your brother are 
close, but you have some—
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: —tension sometimes. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. Because he’s noisy and he’s a tattletale and he’s mad a lot. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: He’s in trouble a lot. Whew. That’s a lot of pressure for an older 
brother to have—
CLAYTON: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: —a younger brother like that. 
CLAYTON: And I have to babysit him sometimes.  
JOHN: Really? 
CLAYTON: And my cousins, who are three and one, so. 
JOHN: How does that go? 
CLAYTON: Not so well. 
JOHN: Really? What usually happens? 
CLAYTON: Just a lot of stress, because they all have a lot of energy. 
JOHN: Mmm. 
CLAYTON: And, yeah. 
JOHN: That’s a big responsibility. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. And then you, with—especially, I mean, a one-
year-old, I suppose, although the one-year-old’s maybe talking? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
CLAYTON: She can’t even talk, so that makes it even harder. 
JOHN: So she’s probably really hard to keep track of, and then the 
48
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
three-year-old’s probably—
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And then your brother. Whew. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
You have a lot. I mean, and you like to play football and hockey and 
eat. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And I’ll bet you having a little brother and little cousins kind 
of interferes with that sometimes. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. Have you ever been a bad mood? 
CLAYTON: Yeah.  
JOHN:  Have you? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: What do people do when you’re in a bad, or what do you when 
you’re in a bad mood? What do you look like? What do you act like? 
CLAYTON: Not so well. 
JOHN: No? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Like what? If I was watching, would I see—would you like be 
stomping around, would you—
CLAYTON: I’d probably be yelling. 
JOHN: Yelling. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Like what? What do you yell? 
CLAYTON: It depends on what I’m mad about. 
JOHN: Do you yell at your brother? 
CLAYTON: Well it kind of depends on what I’m mad about. Like, if 
49
Psychotherapy.net
it’s him, I’d yell at him, but sometimes, a lot of the time, it’s my mom 
or brother, because, you know. 
JOHN: So you might be—if I were watching you and you were in 
a bad mood, I might see you yelling at your mom or yelling at your 
brother. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Or just yelling about something that you’re mad about. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. And not normally my dad, because he’s usually out 
of town. 
JOHN: Ah. He’s out of town a lot, so you don’t yell at him. 
CLAYTON: No. 
JOHN: He’s not around. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. Does that make it harder, too, I guess to be the oldest 
person—the oldest kid the family and then your dad’s not even home? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: What’s that like? 
CLAYTON: Kind of hard, because my brother, he—he brags, like he 
thinks he’s just as good as—like he acts like just like an 11-year-old, 
and like all his friends are really kind of annoying.  And, yeah. He’s 
just—gets on my nerves about 90% of the time. So. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
So I’ll be he likes two things. I bet he likes your attention, and as much 
of it as he can get. Kind I’ll bet the other thing he likes it to get you in 
trouble. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. He likes that a lot. 
JOHN: Yeah. So, that’s tricky. So I have some ideas of what might 
work. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: Because I’m betting that the same old thing all the time is 
50
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
going to stop working. 
CLAYTON: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: So do you know—there’s a famous guy who worked a lot with 
rats. Now, I don’t want to say that your brother’s a rat. 
CLAYTON: He acts like one.  
JOHN:  But do you know what the famous guy thought? 
CLAYTON: What? 
JOHN: That punishment—you know what punishment is? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah? That’s like if you do something I don’t like—right? Let’s 
say you’re messing up your hair, and I go knock it off. Stop it. 
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: Stop it. Stop messing up your hair. Stop it. So what do you 
want to do? 
CLAYTON: Keep doing it. 
JOHN: Yeah. A lot of times—what he said was that punishment, when 
you punish someone, it just doesn’t work very well, because usually—
hold out your hand. If I push you, what do you want to do? 
CLAYTON: Push you back. 
JOHN: You want to push back, right? And pretty soon, we’re just 
pushing, and I’m saying, stop that! And you’re saying, I’ll do it if I 
want to. Right? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: And so he said, punishment, not effective. 
JOHN: Rita, as we watch this session, and we’re in the middle at this 
point, I kind of find myself a little bit struck by how powerful the first-
born birth order dynamic seems to be affecting Clayton in his life. 
And of course the family consolation method that I used to sort of 
uncover that is just one method. There are other methods, like earliest 
recollections, which, eh, it can be a little harder to do with a 10-year-
51
Psychotherapy.net
old. 
RITA: Right, right. You know, and I noticed that you were using an 
educational approach. In fact, I think our friend B. F. Skinner may 
have actually been invited into the room. 
JOHN: Now, I never actually said the word Skinner, but, you know, 
my justification for that is that both Adler and Skinner would agree 
that punishment is generally an ineffective strategy, both in families 
and in life. 
RITA: In this next clip, you say something paradoxical, kind of, that 
people can watch for. 
JOHN: Right. And I also try my best to keep Clayton awake and 
engaged. 
RITA: Which can be challenging. So let’s watch and see if that worked. 
CLAYTON: And I’d know where I’d get the money. 
JOHN:  That’s true. It’s probably pretty expensive to send a seven-
year-old to a hot place in Africa. 
CLAYTON: Yeah, at least if I would have to pay for a round trip.  
JOHN:  That’s right. 
CLAYTON: So. 
JOHN: I can’t help but wonder, though, if thinking your brother is 
annoying—if that’s helpful or not helpful. 
CLAYTON:  I don’t know. 
JOHN: Because I wonder if you think he’s annoying if that makes him 
more annoying. 
CLAYTON: I don’t know. 
JOHN: I don’t know either. That’s just a test. I wonder about if you 
were to start thinking that, boy, my brother is so nice—that would 
never work. 
CLAYTON: Nuh uh. 
JOHN: No? It’s impossible. 
52
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
CLAYTON: Probably. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
JOHN: Ah, brothers. They are tough. 
CLAYTON: Yes, very. 
JOHN: Do you ever play any games? I’m going to do one with you 
now, even though it’s going to get us out of the camera a little bit. But I 
have this game that I play sometimes. 
CLAYTON: Mmm, OK. 
JOHN: You ready? OK. So we’re going to try to stand up. We’re going 
to stand up. OK. And then, yeah, you should stand just like that, and 
put your toes toward my toes. Stand up pretty straight. So this is called 
the hand-pushing game. You ever done it? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Have you? Well, you don’t just touch my hands. You stay 
like this, OK? And then you go like that, and then whoever loses his 
balance first, loses. 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: OK? You ready? All right. Are you ready? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: You’re pretty good. I usually win by now. 
CLAYTON:  I’m kind of using the chair. 
JOHN: Oh, you are? Uh oh. 
CLAYTON: [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. 
JOHN: Stand away. Stand back. 
CLAYTON: Hold on. 
JOHN: Uh oh. All right. You’re all right. 
CLAYTON: [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. 
JOHN: Now, OK. Now I can win. 
53
Psychotherapy.net
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: Ah, did you move your foot? 
CLAYTON: Yes. 
JOHN: Yes. I got you. OK. You ready? Round two? Oh. That’s—I 
forgot to tell you—one rule is you can’t hit people in the chest or 
anything. OK. So now you know that. Because I mean, I could go like 
that and just push you. 
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: Ugh! Ugh! Whoops. You OK? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. Ooh. All right. That’s two. One more? 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: OK. This is a little bit like your brother, right? 
CLAYTON: A tiny bit. 
JOHN: How is it like him? 
CLAYTON: Probably the shoving. Oh, oh. 
JOHN:  Ah. I guess I’m the champion. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: So how do you think I won? 
CLAYTON: Because you’re bigger. 
JOHN: Ah. That does help. 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: When you weigh more. 
CLAYTON: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so that’s why probably whenever you try to go up against 
your dad or your mom, you kinda lose. 
CLAYTON: If my mom’s tried to, move my arm in certain directions, 
she can’t do it, but other than that, she can get me. 
54
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Can she? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. So you know what I like to—you know the trick of the 
game? So stick your hands out so we can do this sitting down. So you 
can almost always win—and if you do with your brother, I guarantee 
you you will win. OK? 
CLAYTON: OK. 
JOHN: Do you know why? But not just because of size, but because 
of—do you know what the word strategy means? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. It’s like if you were playing football or you were playing 
hockey, and you fake somebody out. Have you done that before? 
CLAYTON: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: You know, you act like you’re going one direction, then you go 
the other direction—fake ‘em out. So here’s the deal. One of the things 
that makes brothers annoying is a thing called revenge. You know 
what revenge is? 
CLAYTON: Yeah. 
JOHN: So if you do this, OK? You start the game. You say, hey, Carter, 
do you want to play a game I learned? OK. And then you go like this, 
go, really fast. Like, slap him in the hands. And you know what he’s 
going to want to do? 
CLAYTON: Get me back. 
JOHN: Exactly. And so then what do you do? 
CLAYTON: Dodge it. 
JOHN: Just dodge it and he falls over, just like you did that one time, 
right. 
CLAYTON:  
JOHN: And so it’s sort of a trick. And that’s exactly, I think, what’s 
going on with you and Carter, is it he annoys you. Right? He goes like 
this. Is that annoying? Huh? 
55
Psychotherapy.net
CLAYTON: Kind of. 
JOHN: Am I being annoying? 
CLAYTON: Yes. 
JOHN: And then what do you? 
CLAYTON: Get him back. 
JOHN: Yes. You want to get him back. But he—the problem is he want 
you to get him back, because you are—
CLAYTON: Bigger. 
JOHN: No. 
CLAYTON: Older. 
JOHN: Sort of. 
RITA: So John, in that last session, I noticed that you used the 
hand-pushing technique, which was interesting. It’s not necessarily 
Adlerian. 
JOHN: Right, it’s not. It’s really—I really was wanting to keep Clayton 
awake and engaged and involved, and I do think that Adlerian theory 
is very open to using all kinds of different strategies to help people 
glimpse different ways of acting and thinking in life. And so, yes, I use 
that, and I like it. I feel like it’s a fairly—
RITA: It worked. 
JOHN: —useful strategy with kids. 
RITA: Well, you’re right. And Adlerian therapists often use very 
provocative and interesting interventions. Sometimes they name them 
sort of provocative names, like spitting in the soup. 
JOHN: Right, which is a little bit gross. So let’s not talk about that 
anymore. But instead, I would say that the Adlerian use of those 
provocative techniques is designed to enhance insight, which Adler 
believed then insight would enhance motivation toward positive 
changes. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. And I also wanted to note that Adlerians will often 
involve the parent or the caretaker of a child when you’re working 
56
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
with a child Clayton’s age. 
JOHN: Right. And another shout-out or positive thing about Adlerian 
approaches is that the Adlerians were really some of the first to 
emphasize doing parent consultations as a means of helping improve 
family life and children’s behaviors. 
RITA: And even though we didn’t see a parent in this particular clip, 
I really think Adlerian is a great choice for a kid like Clayton, and can 
make a real difference. 
JOHN: This session is an example of the existential approach, and it 
features a colleague of ours, Dr. Nilda Soto Bishop. If I were to try to 
boil down the existential perspective into a sentence or so, I’d say it 
focuses on meaning. And so the listening focus for the counselor or 
psychotherapist is on listening for what’s important or meaningful to 
the individual client. 
RITA: Right. I also think it’s about self-awareness and consciousness. 
JOHN: And it’s about living life fully, embracing life fully, even in the 
face of death and other ultimate existential concerns. 
RITA: Including aging, which has a big one for some of us. Peggy, 
who’s featured in this clip, is a 62-year-old graduate student, so 
obviously some of these issues are real for her. 
JOHN: And Nilda helps Peggy focus on some doubts and some 
concerns, as well as being genuine and spontaneous in the session. 
Another thing is that she also tries to develop an I-Thou relationship, 
and I think that’s consistent with existential theory—I-Thou 
relationship being a deep respect and honoring of the other person, 
and yet, at the same time, being genuine and spontaneous. 
RITA: Mm-hmm So let’s watch Nilda and Peggy at work. 
BISHOP: Where do you want to go with this session? What do you 
feel like you could benefit most from talking about this section? 
PEGGY: Well, you know that picture of the big jar and—it’s Stephen 
Covey, I think. And you fill it with the big rocks, and then you say, 
is the jar full? And then say, oh, yes, the jar is full. And then he says, 
well, no, wait. Look, you can put all this gravel—
57
Psychotherapy.net
BISHOP: Gravel in. 
PEGGY: —in it. Yeah. 
BISHOP: Yes. 
PEGGY: And then is it full? Oh, yeah, well, no. You can put the sand 
in and then put water in it. And then what’s the lesson? And the people 
always think the lesson is you can always get more in the jar. But the 
lesson is, really, that those big rocks have to go in first. 
So I’ve been thinking about that a lot—to know what the big rocks 
are and make sure they’re in the jar. And so my family, and work, and 
school, and my spiritual life are all in the jar. And I guess I would 
say that in these last few weeks, I just feel like those four rocks are 
jockeying for position—
BISHOP: In the jar. 
PEGGY: —in the jar, yeah. 
BISHOP: OK. They’re jockeying for position in that jar. But they all fit 
in the jar. 
PEGGY: They’re in the jar, right. 
BISHOP: They’re in the jar and they fit. 
PEGGY: Yeah. 
BISHOP: So tell me what position do they need to be in in that jar? 
PEGGY: Well—
BISHOP: What do they—
PEGGY: I actually would like to throw the work rock out of the jar. 
BISHOP: Oh, really? 
PEGGY: Yeah. I feel just—I feel frustrated at work, like it’s just, I’m 
in the wrong place. It’s taking up too much time for the amount of 
reward. All of the reward is just financial, and I am ready to say—you 
know, they always say follow your passion. And the money, well—
BISHOP: Yes. Money is not your passion. 
PEGGY: And that seems completely unrealistic, especially toward the 
58
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
end of life, when you’re supposed to be thinking of putting stuff away. 
But when I think, so I should just do this for another 10 years and 
retire, it just makes me feel like screaming and tearing out my hair. I 
can’t do it. 
BISHOP: Wow. 
PEGGY: I physically can’t do it. I have to do something else. 
BISHOP: Something different has to come. 
PEGGY: Yeah. It takes such a big chunk of life. 
You know, I’d like to say—in fact, I do say to my husband—why don’t 
you just think about this and see how you feel? And I actually do think 
that will be part of the process, when he just says, you know, I just feel 
like you need to do this. And he hasn’t said that yet. I mean, he’s asked 
me if I think this is just an expensive hobby—
BISHOP: School? 
PEGGY: —which—yeah. 
BISHOP: Isn’t that interesting. 
PEGGY: For a while, I could sort of agree with him. It sort of is. I’m 
just doing it for fun. But the more I’m in the program, the more I sort 
of like fish or cut bait. You’re either going to be invested in it, or else 
you’re just, you know, like—I don’t know. You just wanted a diploma 
on your wall. That would be an expensive hobby. 
BISHOP: It would be an expensive hobby, but school is one of the 
rocks. 
PEGGY: Yeah. 
BISHOP: And it sounds like it incorporates some of that spiritual 
part. 
PEGGY: Yeah. And my family. 
BISHOP: And the work, and family and work. 
PEGGY: Right. It’s bringing me together with my son, and my 
husband always just says, I know you were born to go to school. So 
even if it’s an expensive hobby, he wants to be able to provide that for 
59
Psychotherapy.net
me. 
BISHOP: Yes. And I think born to go to school is one thing, but born 
to be in the program you’re in—
PEGGY: Yeah. 
BISHOP: That’s different, isn’t it? 
PEGGY: It’s taken a while to grow that. 
BISHOP: Isn’t that different? 
PEGGY: Mm-hmm. I can’t—well, it’s so many years when I didn’t feel 
like a grown up. I remember being at my daughter’s volleyball game 
when she was in junior high, and during a break the coach came over 
and was talking to some of us sitting on the bleachers. And in the 
middle of this conversation—which is always kind of difficult for me. 
I never can think of what to say. And I thought, ahh, he thinks I’m 
a grown-up. It was like, . Because I was a mom of a teenage kid, but 
inside, uh, no. That just wasn’t going to go. 
BISHOP: Well, OK. It begs the question—tell me what being a grown-
up means to you then. What is that? What is grown-up? 
PEGGY: Well, just that sense, I guess, that you could to make 
decisions about your own life, that you weren’t just waiting for people 
to tell you what came next. And then you would go, OK. Although, 
I mean, even as I say that, I know with the kids that I just really like, 
give me those kids.  And that was kind of primal and just in my bones. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. 
PEGGY: But in every other area, it was really like, ah—that sense of 
not being able to ask for things. That was always pretty strong. In fact, 
it just seems like recently, since I’ve been coming to counseling, that 
I’ve had that feeling like, boy, I could ask for things that I want. And 
I think even in kind of little practical ways, like, to say, you know, I 
know you feel on uneasy around my kids, but do you think you could 
just come stay with them for an afternoon? Even something like that, 
where, nah, I don’t want to do that. 
And so somethings that I really want—like this. I really, really want 
to go to school. And I am actually saying to my husband, I really want 
60
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
to do this. And he—and my son, too. They go, are you sure? Do you 
really see yourself doing this? Because it was sort of be pushing out 
into where I haven’t really been before. 
But I’ve done some training with parents—had groups for foster 
and adoptive parents. But to actually be a professional person, ahh, 
that’s sometimes you have to stop thinking that you would just be 
play-acting and think—it’s like applying to the program, where you 
think, they’ll never take me. That’s ridiculous. And then going, well, 
why wouldn’t they? And the next thing is to say—you’ll never make 
it in the professional world, and to start saying, well, why not? Why 
wouldn’t I? 
BISHOP: That questioner. There’s always that question of there. And 
it’s not just a questioner—kind of a doubter. 
PEGGY: Mm-hmm. 
BISHOP: There’s always a doubter there. OK. 
PEGGY: Always have to prove something. 
BISHOP: OK. Is that the grown-up you or the not grown-up you? 
PEGGY: I think it’s the baby me that says, too scary. Too hard. The 
gifted child me that I learned pretty quick—well, maybe not quick 
enough, but certainly by sixth grade—if you stand out, if you excel, if 
you put your head up where people can see you, somebody is going to 
chop that off. 
They’re going to send you to the principal’s office every day during art 
so that you can learn to type, or they’re going to push you out of this 
grade into the next grade to leave all your friends behind and meet a 
lot of people who think you have no business being there, or whatever 
that thing is. Don’t stick out. And so it just makes you kind of want to 
not rock the boat. 
BISHOP: So I’m wondering—I’m just wondering this. It makes me 
curious about whether there’s part of that gifted sixth-grade you 
that knows, knows that if you keep being gifted and you keep being 
outstanding, eventually someone’s going to ask something of you you 
cannot accomplish, and then you’re busted. 
61
Psychotherapy.net
PEGGY: No, I don’t think it’s like that at all. 
BISHOP: OK, good. 
PEGGY: Because it’s thinking I can do something that keeps me 
moving. It’s like now, when you just go, hey, OK, I’ve achieved 
anonymity. There’s nobody around me. My kids are gone, so they’re 
not drawing in adverse attention. And I just have a—you know, it’s not 
a great job, but just, I have a job. And I have good benefits. And I could 
just disappear in that thing. I could. 
But there’s this thing inside that goes, you want more. You want more. 
You want more. And I think that’s what struggles with that long ago 
voice that says, and you know if you reach for more, there’s going to be 
penalties. And really, by seventh grade, they’re going, you have such 
a great potential, because you’re scoring 99 all the way across on the 
achievement test. And why aren’t you doing better in school? 
And by then, inside you really are saying, are you kidding? I know 
better than that. No way am I going to—and just kind of stay down in 
the middle of the pack. But when life just gets routine and ordinary, 
boy, this thing comes up, because  you could have more than this. 
RITA: Nilda tries an explanation that Peggy says no to in this session, 
which I really liked. I liked how that worked. I could feel Peggy’s 
strength in the relationship, and Nilda rolled with it. It was, yeah, 
that’s fine. 
JOHN: You know, I think that flows from the existential concept of 
presence and sort of being present in the room. And Nilda is able to be 
accepting of Peggy having a different perspective than her, which is a 
really valuable thing. I also really like the moment in the session where 
Peggy says, you want more, you want more. Because I think it was 
exciting and fun, but also it’s a preview of what’s coming next. 
RITA: So let’s watch for Nilda and Peggy working on some of those 
existential issues of delight and excitement. 
BISHOP: Listening to you talk about school—and I understand that 
when you were with those kids, raising kids, that was feeding you. And 
now you’ve moved into a different place because at a certain point, 
those kids are now going to be doing something different. And they’re 
62
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
on their own path. 
PEGGY: Pretty much, yeah. 
BISHOP: Yeah. So here you are, and school is the next leg of your 
journey, it seems like. That is the leg of the journey you’re on. And 
when I hear you, when I see you, I just sense in you, as you talk about 
what school means to you, I sense that you are so delighted and so 
comfortable, and you really have a sense inside you that this is the 
right thing for you right now. 
PEGGY: Yeah. I’m like, psyched. 
BISHOP: Psyched. She’s psyched. 
PEGGY: Although, you know that thing that says, you really think 
you can do this? I’m not sure if I can. But semester by semester by 
semester, I am having a blast. 
BISHOP: Cool. 
PEGGY: I just like, you know, like people go, what? You’re taking nine 
credits this summer? I go, yes. Hot dog. I can’t wait. Yeah. Yeah. 
BISHOP: So here’s what I—out of curiosity, I would like you to try 
this. Just sitting with that delight and excitement that you feel—there’s 
both. There’s a delight and an excitement. And just sit with that for a 
little while and see what you get from that. And maybe if you could, if 
you would like, just scan your body from head to foot, and don’t forget 
your shoulders and arms. And tell me where do you hold that in your 
body? Where do you hold that absolute—
PEGGY: Oh, absolutely right here. Better than cheesecake. 
BISHOP: The solar pexus. Better than cheesecake. 
PEGGY: Yeah. Oh, yeah. 
BISHOP: It’s just right there. What does it feel like there? 
PEGGY: It just feels full, like full and satisfying. Like, instead of like, 
what—what do I need? What do I need? 
BISHOP: Mmm. 
PEGGY: Just go, hot diggigty. 
63
Psychotherapy.net
BISHOP: Awesome. 
PEGGY: Yeah. That’s good. 
BISHOP: That’s lovely. You don’t feel that when you talk about work, 
but work is—
PEGGY: Oh gosh. Right. 
BISHOP: The purpose of work is to support, perhaps. 
PEGGY: Well, right. It helps me go to school, and that gives it some 
meaning. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. And that gives you the meaning. So that—
PEGGY: Yeah. I’m getting other people into school. That’s the whole 
thing. So I’m involved with a lot of people, and that part is good. It’s 
not like, just total bust. But it’s a frustrating setup, and it’s not very 
energizing. And there’s a lot of—
BISHOP: Mmm. 
PEGGY: It could be, but the parts that could be seem like they’re 
always getting chopped off at the knees. So. 
BISHOP: So if when we talk about your experience in school being 
about delight and excitement, see if you can give me some words for 
your experience at work. 
PEGGY: Hmm. Well, you talked about be taking care of people—
that’s certainly one thing. It just seems like my coworkers are all kind 
of falling apart at the seams, for various reasons, and that’s it’s very 
important that I just be the person that shows up every day that’s 
reliable and is not having crises, although, you know, I have to run off 
for this kid or that kid, but not very often anymore. 
And when I first when, I was crying all the time because of what 
we’ been through with my youngest boy, but now that hardly ever 
happens. I’m usually just pretty together. I resent it sometimes, 
because sometimes I just need to not be the person that’s holding 
everything together, but, um, so—
BISHOP: So if school is excitement and delight, work is—
PEGGY: Uh, it’s hygiene, I guess. I don’t know. It’s like—
64
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
BISHOP: Hygiene. 
PEGGY: Yeah. It’s like, what—shaving your legs, or something. You 
have to do it. 
BISHOP: Yeah. 
PEGGY: Actually, that’s not a good example, but just something like 
that that, you know, it’s just one of those things. Who likes flossing 
their teeth, but you just do it. And that’s sort of like that. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
PEGGY: So it’s not like a complete waste of time, it’s got an important 
function, but just not very fun and don’t look forward to it and I don’t, 
I just—I think put on Facebook somebody said, when I die, I’m going 
to be sorry I didn’t spend more time flossing my teeth. Right. It’s that 
kind of thing. 
BISHOP: Right. 
PEGGY: Mm-hmm. 
BISHOP: So it’s not a waste of time. 
PEGGY: No, it’s not a waste. And it’s something worthwhile. I—you 
know—
BISHOP: Like flossing your teeth. 
PEGGY: I feel good about what I’m doing. I have good connections 
with other clerical staff that need me to give them support and to help 
do some training for them and be there and answer questions, and 
getting people into school is good. And I have really enjoyable contacts 
with students. So it’s not like the job from hell. It’s just that—
BISHOP: Does the gifted little girl come into that job at all. 
PEGGY: She could. 
BISHOP: Can you excel, could—
PEGGY: She could. They could let me write a lot more web pages, 
and let me have my log in so I don’t have to just do everything, give 
it to somebody else, and hope it turns up sometime in the next three 
months. And revise the letters so that they really—you know, and they 
65
Psychotherapy.net
always sort of say, yes, you can do this, but, in reality, it turns out that 
you can’t. So that’s frustrating. I mean, there are times when I think, 
this could be a pretty interesting job, and you could go out and do 
some training and develop some materials. But the university is—
BISHOP: Not giving you that opportunity. 
PEGGY: No. No, they’re not. 
BISHOP: So creative is not one of the adjectives you would use to 
describe this job. 
PEGGY: No. 
BISHOP: And you kind of—
PEGGY: I like to. Yeah. 
BISHOP: My feeling is that you really need for things to be very 
creative in your life. Is that—do you think that’s true? 
PEGGY: Yeah, and I like to make solutions. You know, my dad was an 
engineer. And sometimes I thought if I had known it was going to take 
me 20 years to get married, I would go back, do that part, and be an 
engineer of some kind—either an industrial or civil engineering and 
design things and build things. But I thought at the time I wasn’t very 
good at math, and I thought, I’m going to have kids. That was like, my 
goal. And I got that goal. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. 
PEGGY: And, you know, I was telling you before that sometimes I 
thought, boy, doing that just chopped a hole in the middle of my life, 
and now I’ll never get to do these things I’m really starting to love, 
because I took 20 years of my life and was out of the workforce. But 
I’m not sorry I did that. That was what I wanted to do. And I did it, 
and it pushed me harder than—
BISHOP: It was your choice. 
PEGGY: Yeah. 
BISHOP: You made that very deliberate choice. 
PEGGY: If I had birthed those kids, that would have been a different 
picture—a whole different picture. But as it was, they needed me. I 
66
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
needed them. It was a good symbiotic relationship. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. 
PEGGY: And I think it’s put me on the path to where I am now. I 
think it’s brought things out of me that I didn’t know I had—when I 
didn’t feel like a grown-up, when I felt like I have to hide from every 
scary thing. I could not hide from their scary things because they were 
my kids. 
BISHOP:  
PEGGY: So that was a different way of approaching life than I had had 
before. It was like, you can disappear—disappear. You know? I made a 
pile on all this weight, because that makes you invisible in this culture. 
And but with my kids, I couldn’t afford to disappear, because they 
needed to have somebody advocate for them. 
And so they pulled me back to life in a way—I mean, I always thought, 
I just want a boring, simple life. I would think that. But it wasn’t true, 
and they’re the ones  that really just called my bluff. I didn’t want life 
to be boring and simple. 
BISHOP: Mm-hmm. 
PEGGY: I wanted it to be tough and challenging. 
BISHOP: I’m kind of struck as you talk about that—the word that 
kind of stayed with me in all of that. Concept’s stay with me, but the 
word that stayed with me through that is this symbiotic, because 
it seems a really important part of your life. It seems, when I look 
at these rocks, pretty much it’s all—everything you do is kind of 
symbiotic. Everything is supporting everything in your life. 
PEGGY: That’s interesting. 
BISHOP: It’s kind of the integrative forces. 
PEGGY: So they all just pull together sort of—
BISHOP: Doesn’t it seem, kinda? 
PEGGY: But the work doesn’t want to. 
JOHN: Rita, in that proceeding segment, I really like the part where 
they’re using the metaphor. And Peggy talks about really feeding 
67
Psychotherapy.net
herself, feeding herself with school, with something that gives her 
delight, and obviously a very positive in her life. 
RITA: Yeah. Yeah. And, of course, as professors, how could you not 
love that she pats her stomach and says, it feels as good as cheesecake. 
JOHN: It even tastes better than cheesecake. And I think this is 
consistent with what Kurt Schneider, who’s a famous existential 
writer, talks about when he says embracing the awe of life—kind of 
rediscovering the awe or the excitement, the deep excitement, of life. 
RITA: Yeah. Obviously for Peggy in her stage of life and her issues, 
existential work is a great avenue for her. 
JOHN: In this next session, one of my favorite counselors, RITA, 
is doing person-centered therapy with a man named Michael. And 
I’d like to start by saying in 1942, Carl Rogers said—he made a bold 
claim—he said that personality change and positive therapy outcomes 
will occur, can occur, based completely on the development and 
establishment in therapy of a certain type of relationship between 
client and therapist. 
RITA: I’m really quite complimented that you said I was one of your 
favorites. I thought for sure you were going to say Carl Rogers, because 
he’s one of your heroes. Anyway, so one of the things that Rogers said 
is that it’s both necessary to have those core conditions and sufficient, 
which, at the time, was controversial, and probably still is. 
JOHN: Yeah. And the core conditions are not microskills, even 
though it is important to do active listening when you’re doing 
person-centered counseling. 
RITA: Right. 
JOHN: But the core conditions are attitudes—attitudes that the 
counselor or psychotherapist holds while in the room with the 
client. And those core conditions or attitudes are congruence, or 
genuineness, unconditional, positive, regard, or sort of amped-up 
respect, and empathy, or empathic understanding. 
RITA: Yeah. And for Rogers, I think the idea was, in those conditions, 
with the work together, there would be the emergence. of the self. 
68
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
And one of the things he said was absolutely essential with something 
he called contact, which is that connection in the room between the 
person and the counselor. 
JOHN: And we’ll see as this next segment begins Michael comes in 
and he’s talking about Crohn’s disease, and his medical diagnostic 
journey. And that the point where we pick up the session, Rita is 
listening, and he’s talking about some stress that he has experienced in 
his life. 
RITA: Yeah. Let’s watch. 
MICHAEL: I wanted to changed my life so that I didn’t have so much 
stress in my life. I was an independent consultant. I worked, you 
know, 80 hours, 90 hours a week consistently for seven, eight years. 
You know, I didn’t get to see my children kind of thing, even though I 
worked in the home. 
And it was kind of like, I’d fall asleep at my desk, wake up and keep 
working—that kind of feeling. And I’ml ike, I need to change, and 
thankfully I had an opportunity to go teach, which is what I really 
wanted to do. And that’s been fantastic, but at the same time, what I 
do is I tend to go, oh, you know what would be really fun is I could do 
this. And I could help you do this. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
MICHAEL: You know, I’m trying to reduce that in my life, for or, as 
my wife says, try to create barriers so that you say—you can say no. 
And I have a hard time saying no. 
RITA: Yeah. So saying no is hard. So your wife, who knows you well, is 
saying, OK, Michael, maybe you can build a barrier that would allow 
you to say no. 
MICHAEL: Right. Right. And, you know, and then of course I have 
my family in there—of course very helpful, but they have lots of 
needs, as well. They have their own internal issues going on, and they 
have me in the middle trying to help mediate their issues. 
RITA: You mean larger family, not just your kids. 
MICHAEL: Yeah, larger family. Family origin. And so it’s—they have 
69
Psychotherapy.net
issues within themselves. 
RITA: Sure. 
MICHAEL: But I’m the rational one. I can help them. And so I’m their 
sounding boards on both sides. We’re having issues. Can you help me 
deal with that? 
RITA: Wow. Yeah. 
MICHAEL: And how do you say no? Well, I don’t know, and I try, 
but it’s difficult. And but it causes me a lot of stress. It causes me a lot 
stress because I don’t want to take a side for somebody. 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: I don’t—even know I clearly see all you really need is, 
honestly, why don’t you go see a counselor, is what I want to say. 
RITA: Yeah. Yeah. 
MICHAEL: But on one hand, one person says, you know, counselors 
are just friends—which then I have that going through my head too. 
RITA: Sure. 
MICHAEL: And then I have on the other hand the other one, like, oh, 
I don’t need a counselor. I can figure this out on my own. So I’m like, 
but you use me. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
MICHAEL: You know? Yeah, you buy me lunch, but, you know, it’s 
not—
RITA: So if they’re paid friends, you’re not getting much of a salary 
out of this, are you. 
[LAUGHTER] 
MICHAEL: But and I want to be there for them, but it’s just difficult, 
and I can feel it. I mean, it’s the craziest thing, but I can feel it. But 
it’s such a strange disease in some ways, because I just keep thinking 
myself, but it’s not cancer. So what do I have to complain about? 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
70
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
MICHAEL: What’s—why am I—why am I complaining about 
something—OK, so I have an upset stomach. So I have digestive 
troubles that last for a few days. But, you know, I have drugs, and they 
mostly help. You know, and—
RITA: So—
MICHAEL: I don’t know. And it’s hard. It’s hard. You know? I don’t 
really know how to actually wrap my mind around it. I’m still—
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: I feel like it’s, uh—when somebody told me once that 
it’s kind of like, um, the stages of grief, right? Where I feel like I’m 
still oscillating between anger and denial, and I’m wanting to get to 
acceptance, but I just keep brushing it and thinking, I’m almost there. 
No I’m not. And I just keep going back and forth like, ugh. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: Because I feel angry that I can’t—I can’t exercise like I 
used to. I mean, I used to—and my doctor says, oh, you’ll be able 
to get back to triathlon. You’ll be able to get back to marathons. But 
I can’t even run. I mean, it hurts so much. And I’m like, gosh, you 
know, I use to just gut this out. I should just do that. But I know that 
if I do, I damage myself worse. And I know that when I have already, 
that I’m just—I have to lay on the couch for a couple of days. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: I mean, I feel that bad. And when I feel bad, then it’s like, 
oh, yeah, all the stuff that I’m telling you, it doesn’t even bother me, 
because I’m just too tired. I hurt too much. It’s like, when your body 
says you’re done, you’re done.  You know? 
RITA: So you throw yourself at everything as hard as you can, and 
then you hit this wall. You’re out for a while. Then nothing matters, 
because it hurts so bad. You’re so exhausted. You’re forced to be on the 
couch. 
MICHAEL: Right. 
RITA: Then you recover. 
71
Psychotherapy.net
MICHAEL: Right. 
RITA: Then—
MICHAEL: You start thinking about all the little things again. 
RITA: You’re back there. 
MICHAEL: And I want—I would like to get to a place where I can 
find some contentedness in just being OK with this is what I’m—this 
is what I can do. I try to create a mantra, right, where I’m like, just be 
thankful for what you can do, not continue wishing what you could 
do or remember what you used to be able to do. 
And I try to be thankful for that. I think, OK, I went for a ride today, 
and I’m really thankful that I could just go out for a ride today. But 
then I was like, gosh, you know, I used to be able to—you know? Just 
in the back of my mind. I used to be able to do this. I used to. 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: And so in some ways, I feel—I just kind of get mad at 
myself, like, OK. Be OK with it. Be OK with it. 
RITA: So there’s this type A talking to type B, right? 
MICHAEL: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
RITA: And then type B is talking back to type B and—
MICHAEL: Yeah. Yeah. And you know, and I just—and I feel guilt. 
I worry that something is going to make it so that I can’t teach. That’s 
the one thing that I really love to do, and my work. I love computer 
science. I loved writing software. But I really teaching. And so for me, 
if I couldn’t teach, that would be really hard for me. 
RITA: So you’ve had this style in life of, I’m going to just say, gutsing it 
through, being your own central physician. I mean, the story goes all 
the way back to you’re the central problem-solver, and had the energy 
to figure out what was going on, right? 
MICHAEL: Mm-hmm. 
RITA: Network, internet, resources. So you get that figured out, and 
now I’ve arrived in this spot where you know what’s going on, but 
72
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
you’re questioning if the style you’ve had your whole life is going to 
work with this new management issue, with the disorder. 
MICHAEL: Right. Right. 
RITA: And I’m hearing a little fear. 
MICHAEL: Oh, yeah. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Because I mean, it 
just comes back to—I mean, for me, anyway, I have issues with even 
my masculinity sometimes. And so then to have a disease that makes 
you feel like you can’t do all the things you used to be able to do, it 
all of a sudden is—you’re already a face. You know, I already have 
relatives that tell me, well, you just need to toughen up. I was like, well, 
I would like to, but the intestines say no. 
And that’s not one of those things that are very comfortable to talk 
about, either. Again, it’s kind of like, when you have cancer, you say, 
I have cancer. And it kind of trumps all, right? Everybody’s like, well, 
you’re done. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: You know, well, you win, kind of thing. 
RITA: Exactly. 
MICHAEL: And I don’t actually want to win. I just want to be, in 
some ways, left alone. And I don’t want somebody to tell me toughen 
up. I don’t want somebody to tell me, it’s gonna be OK. Everything’s 
OK. I don’t even know exactly what I want. But I have these—I don’t 
even really tell people, and that’s the part that makes it kind of hard 
and strange, is I don’t actually share this with anybody. So when I have 
people that are somewhat strangers coming up to me and saying, how 
are you feeling? I feel like, I don’t know you, and I feel a little nervous 
now. So I—
RITA: Right. A little nervous, a little ashamed, a little resentful that 
this is your story, and you really don’t want to have to tell it every time 
you turn around. 
MICHAEL: Right. 
RITA: Yeah. 
73
Psychotherapy.net
MICHAEL: And how much do you really want to know? 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: Because I have this person that actually, just by pure 
happenstance, I raced with him a lot in triathlon over the last five 
years. He’s a nice guy. And we just had a nice rapport with each other. 
And I saw him the other night when my wife and I went out for a date. 
I’m like, hey, it’s good to see you. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: And he’s like, hey. 
RITA: Hey, how are you? 
MICHAEL: You didn’t race this last weekend. What happened? 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: I’m like—and I just paused. And Karen’s like, I’m going 
through my mind thinking, I don’t even know who this person is. 
Does Michael know this person? I’m like, uhh, and then she’s like, and 
I’m like, well, I just got sick. And he’s like, oh, OK, no problem. She’s 
like—and she asked me about it later. I’m like, I’m also just trying to 
think of the right response for the moment. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: Because I don’t know him that well, but I don’t—I didn’t 
want to be untruthful. I didn’t want to say something that wasn’t true, 
but I—she’s like, I honestly just didn’t know how much you were going 
to go into it. I’m like, I don’t know—I don’t know him that well, and I 
think it would’ve been a little uncomfortable for him. And—
RITA: So it’s almost like inside you’re going, I know this person a little 
bit, but this is my private journey, and I don’t know how much I really 
want to share. 
MICHAEL: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: So that part has been a little hard for me. 
JOHN: As I was watching you, Rita, with Michael, I couldn’t help but 
74
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
notice that Michael was talking a lot. And that’s great. It’s really, really 
good to have a client that’s verbal and talking a lot. But I also thought 
to myself, huh, that makes it even, maybe, a little harder. 
RITA: It’s a little trickier. 
JOHN: It makes it trickier, harder to make contact, to connect, 
because it’s hard to have your presence felt in the interaction. And 
so you were, I think, working hard, doing some paraphrases. And, of 
course, I, really obviously like it. I liked it when you did the walking 
within technique, and you did that just before the break in this 
session. I’m always impressed with that. 
RITA: Yeah. And I think it worked, because we saw Michael shift from 
some of his probably more mundane issues to mentioning things like a 
little fear or a threat to his masculinity, which made me feel like, wow, 
we’ve dropped a level here in terms of trust and deepened into. 
JOHN: It’s a little surprising that you could get to big issues so quickly, 
just using some non-directive person-centered approaches. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. Yeah. In this next section, we’ll watch a little bit 
more, as Michael, I think, works on his world view and—
JOHN: And really kind of his way of being in the world. 
RITA: Right. Exactly. So let’s watch. 
MICHAEL: And you know, I try to read. I try to figure out different 
things. And sometimes it just feels so overwhelming. And honestly, 
because the disease has such a wide range of how people are affected, 
I have a hard time thinking, well, it’s not like I’ve had my colon 
removed. It’s not like I’ve been in the hospital every time. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
MICHAEL: And, you know, and then I also—it’s always interesting 
too, because they’re always like, the people that do find out, like, gosh, 
I have known so many people that have that disease. Like, it’s like, 
that’s so interesting. 
RITA: Yeah. 
MICHAEL: I’m like, I guess. 
75
Psychotherapy.net
RITA: Yeah. Interesting, yeah. But I notice a lot of times when you 
tell me about what’s going on inside of you, I’m hearing this internal 
scolding pattern. It’s like you get in touch with a feeling—maybe 
resentment, maybe guilt, maybe sadness—and then you yell at 
yourself in there, and say, well, at least you’ve still got part of your 
colon. What are you complaining about? 
MICHAEL: Right.  It’s true. It’s true. It’s like this quit-feeling-sorry-
for-yourself feeling. Maybe it was the way I was raised. I don’t know. 
Because, I mean, I didn’t—it wasn’t like I was—I mean, of course I’ve 
had a lot of blessings in my life that I feel so thankful for. And so I 
really think about that a lot—thinking about, gosh. 
And I’ve always had that problem growing up, thinking, gosh, I have 
been given so much in my life. And it’s not like I haven’t had my share 
of issues, obviously. But I just feel like I’ve been given so many things. 
You know? I was adopted. I could have been left on this doorstep 
where I would have most likely died. 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: But I was brought here, and I got to live this amazing 
life, so what do I have to complain about? So that’s what kind of 
goes through my—that’s the dialog that goes through my head, like, 
yeah, I’ve had this bad thing happen, but, you know, it could’ve been 
worse. It could’ve been, you know, whatever. I could’ve lost my arms 
or I could’ve—I could be dead. You know, so I kind of go to those 
extremes, sometimes. 
I’m sitting there on the couch, it’s dark. The dogs are sleeping or 
snoring. And I’m just sitting there like, OK. One more hour. I can 
make it. I can make it. You know, in those times, I’m like, OK, I can 
feel sorry for myself for a little while, because no one’s awake. No one’s 
depending on me. Nobody’s needing anything. And so it’s that time. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
MICHAEL: You know? And, but then I’m like, OK, it’s going to be all 
right. And I can take another drug here, and I’m going to be fine now, 
and I’m going to feel good. And so—
RITA: So even when you’re feeling sorry for yourself in these really 
76
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
private quiet times, part of the message you’re giving yourself is, the 
drugs—it’ll be better in a little while. So it’s not that all the way down 
to just why is this happening to me? 
MICHAEL: No. And that’s the part that I’m a little afraid of doing, 
honestly. I am. I’m afraid of going to that level. Like, because, in some 
ways in my mind, I think, gosh, you’re just whining, or you’re just 
complaining, you know, and I don’t complain.  
RITA: So that inner—we’ll call him Mr. Type A. But that inner thing 
is not letting you face into the despair side of this. Boy, you just get 
scolded right back away from that. 
MICHAEL: Yeah. Pretty quick. I mean, I’ll get there, and I’ll feel bad. 
I’ll even—I mean, I can’t even weep about it, at times. Because I’m just 
like, no, it’s not. It’s fine. It’s going to be OK. 
And that’s where my feelings of guilt—you know, when my wife has to 
make two different dinners, one that the children will eat and one that 
will work for me. 
RITA: That will work for you. Right. 
MICHAEL: You know? And she’s happy to do it, but it makes me feel 
bad. And I’m like, honestly, let’s just make a bunch stuff, stick it in the 
freezer, and I’ll just pull it out so that I’m not bothering anybody. You 
know? But she’s like, it’s fine. It’s fine. But it makes me feel bad. 
RITA: So this goes all the way back to parental messages of get up 
there and take a lot of room in the world. And what I’m hearing is you 
really don’t know how much space you should take up in the world. 
MICHAEL: Right. 
RITA: You just don’t know. 
MICHAEL: Right. And that’s the part I don’t—which is fascinating, 
because my alter ego in front of the classroom is I can be as big as I 
want—not in a bad way. And I mean, one of the things—and, you 
know, I always think, for me, since I love teaching so much, I think 
about it all the time. It gives me a lot of life. 
And I think about just my own theories on how I teach—because 
I was never taught formally. I mean, I wasn’t like—I didn’t go to 
77
Psychotherapy.net
education school. I wish I would have. 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: And I was like, but I’ve made up my own theories on 
just common sense, in my mind, but just creating this atmosphere 
of community, creating this atmosphere of respect between your 
students, and not where they feel like they’re able to run you over, but 
where we can have a true dialog, and have this conversation. 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: But I feel like I can just do whatever I want to in that 
arena. And—
RITA: Right. That’s where you’re at home. 
MICHAEL: Yeah, absolutely. 
RITA: That’s where you can take up all the space you need. 
MICHAEL: And it’s fascinating. Because I tell my wife this. When I 
get in front of the classroom, it’s like sometimes I’m so lost in what’s 
going on, it’s like I have to snap back into reality when I’m done. Like, 
I’m always like, oh, wow, the hour’s over. And everyone’s engaged, and 
everyone’s there, and everyone’s participating. And we just created this 
whole nother world for an hour, an hour and a half. And I’m like, oh, 
that was weird. And it was the one thing that was helping me take my 
mind off of the things that were hurting me during all that time. 
RITA: Yeah. That’s the flow or the muse or whatever. You’re there. 
MICHAEL: So my stomach or my digestion—all of that was just 
distraught and just all this pain. But I’d get in front of the classroom, 
and just for that hour, it could just go away, unless it was really bad. 
RITA: Sure. 
MICHAEL: But I could even figure out ways to accommodate myself. 
I’d go to the restroom before class, and be like, OK, no, I’m good for 
a while. But it’s just like, it’s like my mind could just disappear for 
a while, and I could just let it go. And even all my little things that 
bother me, they’re let go, just for that. And I imagine that’s exactly—
and you say muse, that’s exactly what I imagine artists and painters. 
78
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
That’s where they get. They get to this place where the world’s gone, 
and they’re just—and that’s exactly how I feel. I’m there, and I’m just 
so into it all. 
RITA: Yeah. Yeah. 
MICHAEL: And all these really emergent things come out of it. I 
mean, to me, I see teaching as an organic process, as this feeling of 
all these things that come out of it, that life comes out of that I didn’t 
even imagine. I prepare. There’s no doubt. 
RITA: Sure. 
MICHAEL: But do I go into different worlds? Yeah. But I see it 
as a story. I mean, every lecture, every class is a story. It’s not me 
disseminating information. Sure, I have to give information, but I see 
it more of as this, we’re going to talk about this story that starts at the 
beginning of week one, and we’re going to bring it back to week 15. 
And so when I bring it back in week 15, they’re like, oh my gosh, 
you remember that? I’m like, see? You realize that it’s all connected. 
Everything’s all connected. Maybe it’s Buddhist or something. And 
I just think, but it’s so true. Even in the world of computer science, 
everything’s so connected, and that’s really an interesting thing. That’s 
what I love about it so much. And, you know? I don’t know. 
RITA: So one of your questions is really could that me that’s found 
this home, this peace, this balance, could that me be in other parts of 
my life? 
MICHAEL: Yes. Yes. 
RITA: Could I bring this over and find that balance, that peace, the 
story? 
MICHAEL: Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Because, I mean, even when I 
exercise—not as much now, because, of course, I just can’t, physically, 
but before, I had a hard time just going out for a bike ride to enjoy the 
weather, enjoy the scenery. I was thinking how much time? Can I do it 
faster? Can I go a little bit faster? Can I push myself a little harder? 
RITA: Right. 
MICHAEL: I’m like, what happened to just going out and enjoying the 
79
Psychotherapy.net
ride? You know? And I berate myself a little bit over that, and be just 
like, gosh, why can’t you just go out and ride just to ride? And in some 
ways, I’m really thankful, because now I truly am thankful. 
RITA: Now that question is for real. Yeah. 
MICHAEL: Yeah. I just made it. Thankfully, I just made it through. 
You know? And so that is a different feeling. That has been very 
fascinating. 
JOHN: From the perspective of person-centered theory, one of the 
things that Rogers probably would say about Michael—but maybe 
about all clients and all people—is that he’s suffering from conditions 
of worth that are placed upon him or have been placed upon him 
about who he is and how he functions in the world. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. I really was very moved by the actual description of 
Michael in his struggle to just ride his bike and just enjoy it—not time 
himself, not push himself. And that’s a real struggle for anyone, but 
clearly is a metaphor for Michael as he tries to integrate his medical 
condition with other things in his life that matter. 
JOHN: It’s also a great general example of the importance of letting 
the real self be in and experience the world. 
RITA: Right. It was a great session with Michael, and I think he’s 
the kind of client that works well in the permissive environment of a 
person-centered approach. 
This next session is an example of a Gestalt approach. 
JOHN: Fritz Perls once said, “wake up and come to your senses.” 
RITA: Gestalt is a very physical, very sensory-oriented, and it’s about 
being in the now—being aware of what’s happening in the body. 
JOHN: And really so then what the therapist or the counselor or 
psychotherapist is watching for and listening for in the session are 
things that are happening in the now, emotion, and flashes of insight 
that might be happening. 
RITA: Which is sort of interesting, because it’s sort of lots of parts 
that come together in the work, in Gestalt work, and it’s all about 
integration. Gestalt is really about the whole, about integration. 
80
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Now, in this upcoming segment, I’m working with Sydney, and 
it really represents Gestalt therapy accurately in the sense that it’s a 
little bit spontaneous and unplanned. He starts by telling a dream that 
he’d had the night before, and from the dream, we shift into the empty 
chair technique, which is a classic Gestalt technique. 
RITA: That’s right. One thing that’s true about Gestalt work is it’s not 
necessarily planned. Let’s watch as John works with Sydney with some 
of these techniques. 
SYDNEY: And at the same time, I think there’s an element of either 
perfectionism or something like that, that when I experience those 
moments, or I think I do, that it may get a little blown up in terms 
of its magnitude, or overgeneralized in some way. So it can be—and 
that’s why, I guess, laughter feels like the appropriate response, as I 
wrestle with those disparities in some point. 
JOHN: And so the anxiety, what kind of—from the stomach to the 
chest, and then now it’s sort of turned into laughter, feeling a little bit 
silly about it. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: I want us to try something, if it’s OK. And one of the things in 
Gestalt therapy is that we do things we call experiments. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And so if you don’t mind, I’m actually going to get out of 
this chair and we’re going to do a thing that we call the empty chair 
technique. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And I’ll move back. And I hear two sort of distinct parts in 
there, one part being anxiety. And so I’d like you to put anxiety in this 
chair. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And have you, in that chair—and you have a conversation 
with the anxiety in more of an active way. 
SYDNEY: OK. OK. 
81
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: Does that make sense? 
SYDNEY: I think so. 
JOHN: If at any point you have questions, let me know, and I’ll sit 
back here and I’ll make some comments as you talk to your anxiety. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: OK? 
SYDNEY: OK. So anything I want to say to my anxiety. 
JOHN: Anything you want to say to it is a place to start. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And then the anxiety will get a chance to speak as well. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: OK. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: All right? So I’m slipping back here. And so we put the anxiety 
right here. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And—or here. 
SYDNEY: OK.  
JOHN: And you just tell the anxiety what you would like it to know. 
SYDNEY: OK. I guess I would like you to know that I’m not always 
clear and sure as to why you show up and as to what your function is, 
if there is a useful function. I think sometimes a little bit of you might 
be fine, but a lot of you is not fine, and is counterproductive in a way. 
JOHN: Kind of like, I don’t know why you’re here sometimes. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Certainly I don’t know why a lot of you is here. Maybe a little 
bit of you is OK. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Move over and be the anxiety and talk back to Sydney. What 
82
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
do you have to say to Sydney, who’s now in that chair? 
SYDNEY: Well, Sydney, I guess I would say that I’m here to make sure 
that you do what you’re supposed to do and that you stay on track, 
and that you have some negative feeling, which is me, associated with 
behaviors that don’t fit with your values. So that’s why I’m here, is to 
remind you of when your behavior doesn’t fit well with your values. 
[JOHN gestures for Sydney to move back to his original chair to 
respond to his anxiety. Sydney moves back to his original chair.] 
SYDNEY: Well, I would respond to that by saying, you have a good 
point. At the same time, you can be a little excessive sometimes. It’s 
good for me to have reminders that encourage me to be motivated to 
align with what I believe and my values, at the same time, sometimes 
you reach a point to where that isn’t helpful anymore, where there’s 
too much of you in the picture. 
[JOHN gestures for Sydney to move to the chair and respond as his 
anxiety. Sydney moves back to his original chair.] 
SYDNEY: OK. So, that is an interesting point. And I could see how too 
much of me could be debilitating—too much of anxiety, of me, could 
be debilitating. And so perhaps—yeah. You have a good point. I’m not 
sure what else to say about that. Part of me wants to say I will temper 
myself down a little bit or tone it down a little bit so that I’m not so 
in-your-face at times when maybe you need just a little bit of me, as 
you’ve made clear. So part of me wants to say that, that I’ll temper it a 
little bit. 
JOHN: OK. Let’s go back to Sydney and just talk a couple minutes, 
or maybe just a few seconds, and then I want to guide you through 
another little piece of this. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: What comes up for you as you do this dialogue? 
SYDNEY: I think the first thing that comes up is seeing—or feeling, 
not just seeing—but I guess this feeling level of feeling like this anxiety 
is just another part of me that I, Sydney, have some measure of control 
over, that perhaps I sometimes forget or I’m not aware of—that this 
83
Psychotherapy.net
is a part of me that sometimes I want to push away and say it’s an 
external thing that’s acting on my life in a way that has a negative 
impact sometimes. 
And through this empty chair activity, it feels as if—verbalizing from 
the standpoint of anxiety makes me feel like it’s just a part of me, and 
like other parts of me, I have some self-determination in how it shows 
up, to what degree, and see the utility of that voice within certain 
boundaries, I guess and limitations. 
JOHN: OK. So what I’d like you to do is to talk again to the anxiety. 
Begin by saying, thank you, anxiety. I hear you wanting to be helpful. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And then maybe ask the anxiety, are you worried that I might 
not live up to my own values? 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: And so just try to—again, find your own words, I guess, for 
that. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: But that kind of message. And then go over and be the anxiety. 
SYDNEY: OK. OK. So, anxiety, I appreciate your concern for me and 
wanting to make sure that I live in alignment with my values. And 
I thank you for that, for keeping me on track in that regard. And I 
also hear that you’re concerned that without doing that, or without a 
certain degree of that, that I will slip in some way. 
JOHN: I’d like to hear what anxiety has to say in 
[Sydney moves to the other chair to respond as his anxiety.] 
SYDNEY: So I hear what you’re saying, Sydney, and, I—I think that 
this discussion between us has been good in the sense that it lets me 
know that I play an important role in your life of being there to serve 
as a motivator, as even an inspiration, perhaps, in some way, but also 
that I can overstep my bounds. And so thank you for sharing that with 
me, as this discussion helps me figure out how much of me is the right 
amount, how much is too much and is unhelpful. 
84
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Mm-hmm. So while you’re in the anxiety chair—anxiety, I 
heard Sydney saying to you that he appreciates you. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: He values you. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And thanked you. And what does that feel like to you, to 
anxiety? 
SYDNEY: To anxiety? 
JOHN: What’s it feel like? 
SYDNEY: I think I kind of smile, I guess, because I feel like perhaps 
I’ve been told by Sydney that you shouldn’t be here. You should be 
gone, abolished from existence in some way. So that’s the first thing 
that comes up. 
JOHN: In some ways it feels validating? 
SYDNEY: Yeah, like it’s OK for me to be here as part of you, as part of 
your life, in a way. 
JOHN: Yeah. You have a purpose. You have a function. 
SYDNEY: I have a purpose and a function, yes, as opposed to being in 
this tug-of-war, in a way, where Sydney’s always trying to kick me out. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: As we were watching the preceding segment, Rita, it reminded 
me of how important it is for Gestalt therapists to not interpret, even 
so sometimes there’s a tug in that direction. 
RITA: Oh, yeah. 
JOHN: And I felt like I might want to tell Sydney what I thought of 
some of the things that he was doing and saying—what it might mean. 
And so I was as a little proud of myself for holding back and directing, 
which is the role of the Gestalt therapist, as opposed to interpreting. 
Because it’s really Sydney’s experience to interpret. 
RITA: It’s true, although, of course, therapists always make some kind 
of decision. And I noticed that you went with anxiety, and you didn’t 
85
Psychotherapy.net
go with shame—things he mentioned. 
JOHN: Right. And, you know, I don’t even remember making that 
decision. 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: But actually, in retrospect, I feel better about going with 
anxiety. I think that would be easier than to try to do both at once or 
to go with shame first. 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: You know, another thing that happened is that I had 
Sydney—I had him talk to his anxiety, and I’m just curious about 
what you thought of that. 
RITA: Well, I liked it. It’s a great technique, and I think the empty 
chair and the talking is always very interesting. I don’t think Sydney 
went super deep and we really heard the voice of his anxiety. We heard 
Sydney, as anxiety. But still, I thought it was pretty helpful, yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. And Sydney is really very good at sort 
of taking on the voice of those different entities inside himself. 
RITA: Yeah. And in this next section, we’re going to watch some 
dream work, where you ask Sydney to take on the voice of the different 
parts of the dream, which—classic Gestalt, isn’t it? 
JOHN: And it’s not easy often for clients to do that, and so watch to 
see how Sydney does it. 
JOHN: One thing we didn’t do with the dream, because you went 
through it speaking first person. But what you didn’t do was we didn’t 
give you a chance to try on some of the entities in the dream. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so what I’d like you to do now if you’re OK with it is to 
go back through the dream, and I’ll just prompt you to put on the 
different entities, and to be the different parts of the dream. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: OK? 
86
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: So, are you ready? 
SYDNEY: Yeah, I think so. 
JOHN: Deep breath. How about you begin and you are the canoe. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: I know that seems kind of funny, but just say, I am the canoe, 
and I’m—
SYDNEY: OK. I am the canoe, and I’m going down the river, 
downstream. I have two paddlers sitting within me. I’m not sure if 
they know what they’re doing or not. And they start to turn me a little 
bit sideways to the current, and I start to tip over to the side just a bit. 
JOHN: I am tipping over. 
SYDNEY: I am tipping over. And as I’m tipping over, I begin to fill 
with water from the left side. And it starts pouring over my side, and 
I’m filling with water. Then I start to level off and come back to a 
upright position. And I reorient, and I’m floating downstream. I’m 
now—
JOHN: I’m filling with water, I’m filled partway with water? 
SYDNEY: Almost all the way, three quarters. 
JOHN: I’m almost all filled with water. 
SYDNEY: Almost all filled with water—three quarters of the way 
filled with water. 
JOHN: And how does that feel as the canoe, to be almost filled with 
water? 
SYDNEY: Heavy. 
JOHN: I feel heavy. 
SYDNEY: Burdened. Burdened, yeah, and heavy. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. OK. 
SYDNEY: Unwieldy. I feel unwieldy, burdened, heavy. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. Right. 
87
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: OK. And as you say those words, does that connect with 
anything for you? 
SYDNEY: I think it connects with moments that I experience—
heavy, burdened. Unwieldy, not so much, but heavy and burdened. 
And I would say not in the big picture of my life, but right now it’s 
near the end of the semester. It’s sort of a crunch time for me, and I 
feel heavy and burdened, definitely in the last week or two, and I’m 
sort of anticipating that it will continue for another two weeks, that 
heaviness and that burden of having—and I guess the metaphor there 
is sort of having more than I can manage, which is what the canoe is 
experiencing. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Just kind of drifting down the river now. 
SYDNEY: Yeah, and overflowing, as it were, with the burden, with the 
heaviness, in a way. 
JOHN: I’m overflowing with the burden. 
SYDNEY: Yes. 
JOHN: Yeah. OK. And still heading down the river. 
SYDNEY: And still—still, yep, following the path of least resistance, 
in some way it seems, or going with the flow of what the environment 
is telling me. The river is saying, you need to go this way, which is the 
direction of the current. And it’s going to be a lot of work to go in the 
other direction. And even though you may be heavy and burdened, 
that’s the direction we’re going to encourage you or push you in, even. 
Yeah. 
JOHN: And the burden right now feels like all the stuff that you have 
on your plate for the end of the semester. 
SYDNEY: That’s right. 
JOHN: And now let’s just shift a little bit, and you become the river. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: I am the river. 
SYDNEY: OK. I am the river. I’m flowing. I’m dynamic. I’m pushing 
all sorts of things downstream—canoes, sticks, bugs, debris, rocks. 
88
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
I’m flowing. I’m moving. I’m a little bit—a little bit murky. My clarity 
is not that good to come full circle to clarity. It’s a little murky. I have 
a lot of different features. There’s places of calm water, places of faster 
water, places where there’s log jams, obstructions, rocks. 
JOHN: There’s a lot. There’s a lot, to me. 
SYDNEY: There’s a lot. I’m diverse. I’m diverse and dynamic and 
changing. 
JOHN: What’s it feel to say that? 
SYDNEY: It feels—the first thing that it feels is this connection with 
what I just mentioned about anticipating the next two weeks to be 
busy. The first thing that I felt was sort of this connection with how 
rivers change with the season—how the snow melts and they come up 
and they flow big and swollen, and lack of clarity. They’re murky. You 
can’t see as well. And they’re more brown, and more debris is floating 
down as the runoff collects all of those things. 
JOHN: There’s so much going on that it’s murky. 
SYDNEY: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SYDNEY: And then as the season progresses, the water level starts 
to lower. It becomes more tranquil, calmer. You can look into it and 
see fish over here, and the bottom over here. So the clarity of the 
river increases as that period of time that is a natural changing in the 
seasons sort of waxes and wanes. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SYDNEY: Yeah. 
JOHN: Do you have a part of the year that feels more clear to you, and 
still? 
SYDNEY: Yeah. I think the summer. I think the summer does, yeah. 
JOHN: OK. Let’s take one more object in the dream and explore it a 
little bit, if that’s OK. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
89
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: How about you become the other paddler. 
SYDNEY: OK. 
JOHN: I am in the front of the boat, and Sydney is behind me. 
SYDNEY:  I laugh because the first thing that pops into my awareness 
is the comment, I don’t know what I’m doing, and it sounds like 
Sydney doesn’t know what he’s doing either. He’s not telling me what 
to do in a way that makes sense, that is clear. So to speak from that 
perspective of that paddler, I’m confused. I’m frightened. I have the 
tools that I need, such as this paddle, in my hand, but I don’t have the 
internal tools, such as the knowledge and skill that I need. And the 
person that I’m looking to for that isn’t being effective in transmitting 
that knowledge and skill to me. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
SYDNEY: And, um—and I also feel, as the first paddler, some sense 
of, oh well. Like, a little bit like those things are true that I said—not 
having the skill—but, oh well, the consequence isn’t that great. It’s 
almost as if either I don’t know what the consequences are—sort of 
an ignorance is bliss thing. I don’t know that it’s a big deal to flip the 
canoe and perhaps capsize and all of that. But just that, uh, yeah, it’s 
no big deal. 
JOHN: OK. 
SYDNEY: I’ll just roll with it. 
JOHN: Does this—you’ll just roll with it. 
SYDNEY: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah. So I don’t have the skills I need. I’m not getting great 
help. And yet I’m not terribly upset about this or concerned. I have a 
little bit of an ignorance is bliss attitude. 
SYDNEY: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Does that connect to anything in your life? 
SYDNEY: Yeah.  The last piece of that—the sort of I’ll just roll with it. 
JOHN: Watching the clip with Sydney just made me think, wow, he 
was a darn good client. He was able to take on the characters and 
90
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
the objects in the dream. He played the role of the canoe, and did it 
without missing a beat. 
RITA: Yeah. That was great. And even though I was a little bit 
skeptical about the voice he gave to anxiety, I think it helped. I think 
we sensed some integration at the end, which is, of course, one of the 
values that Gestalt therapy has, is that integration. 
JOHN: And theoretically, integration leads to energy, and the desire to 
make contact and move forward in a healthy way in life. 
This next session is an example of behavior therapy, and it features a 
colleague of ours from the University of Montana, a counselor named 
Selena Beaumont Hill, who’s a member of the Crow Tribe here in 
Montana. Now, behavior therapy is all about learning theory—or 
learning theories is probably a better way to express it. But the focus 
is often on what are the rewards or the reinforcers that create and 
maintain behavior, and what are the consequences or the punishments 
that tend to diminish or reduce the rate of behavior. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. And, you know, behavioral therapy is excellent 
for people in positions like Selena’s to work with people who need to 
make significant changes in their behavior, and to make those rather 
quickly. 
JOHN: Now, Selena’s working with Brittany. Brittany has flunked out 
of college. She’s working on getting reinstated. And one thing I like 
about the beginning of the session is that Selena is working on just sort 
of casually discussing—maybe not casually, but discussing the natural 
incentives that are associated with Brittany wanting to be or staying in 
school. 
RITA: Right, and some of the maladaptive behaviors that are probably 
playing a role in her having flunked out. So—
JOHN: Absolutely. So let’s watch. 
RITA: Let’s watch. 
HILL: And I really just want you to describe some of the patterns, 
some of the behaviors, some of the things that you were doing that led 
to the suspension. 
91
Psychotherapy.net
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: So, I’m just going to show you this questionnaire, so you have 
an idea of what I’m doing. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: And this will be part of their reinstatement process, if you do 
choose to go that route. And I guess I should get a feeling, before we 
continue on—do you want to be in school? 
BRITTANY: Yeah. Yeah, I definitely want to be in school. I like school. 
Like, I don’t want to not be in school. 
HILL: OK. what about school do you like? What keeps you here on the 
university campus? 
BRITTANY: Well, I have really good friends here. Like, I feel like 
I’ve made really good friends. And like, I don’t want to have a bad 
job. Like, I want to get a degree so I can have a good job. Yeah. I don’t 
know. Like, I think the town is pretty and the campus is pretty. And I 
mean, I’m pretty happy here. 
HILL: Mm-hmm. And what do you think kept you from going to class 
as regularly as you did when you were in high school? What kept you 
attending your college classes on a regular basis? 
BRITTANY: Well, I think, for one, I don’t have, like, my mom like 
making me get up when I’m tired. And, I don’t know. I don’t think I 
like, love my classes. And because it’s like an option to not go—like 
sometimes I’m just really tired. And it’s hard, too, because like the 
schedule’s so different. 
Because like, with high school, I had to be there at 7:45 every morning. 
It was always the same. But like now it’s like, Tuesday mornings I can 
like, sleep in, but like, Wednesday mornings and Monday mornings, I 
have to get up early. And I don’t know. I think it’s really hard to adjust 
to that, because you don’t have the same schedule all the time. 
HILL: OK. So you need a little more consistency. You feel like that 
might help you. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. I mean, because your body gets all whacked out 
when you’re like, sleeping late and then staying up late, but your body 
92
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
never knows what to expect, really. I think that’s like, part of the 
problem. Yeah. 
HILL: OK. So I’m just going to show this questionnaire to you. And 
there’s a couple—well, there’s several options to choose from. And I 
want you just to pick a couple of those options as far as what you think 
contributed to your academic difficulties. 
BRITTANY: OK. Yeah, I mean, I think those are the main ones. 
HILL: OK. All right. So poor attendance, time management problems, 
and too much partying. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: All three of those are very common for incoming freshmen, or 
freshman, I should say. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: It’s the first time you’re away from your parents, and just the 
independence that you are discovering and trying to find your own 
boundaries, and all of that’s very common. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: The too much partying is also another common experience for 
freshman. The University can be fun. They’re so much to do—
BRITTANY: Right. And it’s not like I’m like drinking all the time. I’m 
just like, with my friends. So sometimes I go out, and I’m not even 
like, have a drink, but it’s just like, hanging out with them, you know? 
HILL: Yeah. I think the social aspect is what gets most teens—or most 
freshmen. Sorry. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Just because you have—you know, you don’t have anybody 
saying, you have to be home at midnight, or you have to get up to go to 
school at 8:00. You know? Nobody’s checking on you, and it’s the first 
time you’re just out being independent and making those decisions. So 
I can definitely see where that can come into play, which then affects 
the attendance. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
93
Psychotherapy.net
HILL: Because you’re out late, even though you’re not maybe doing 
something that you’re not supposed to be doing. You’re just out late. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: Which that means you’re not ready to go the next morning. 
BRITTANY: Right. See, it’s not even like I’m hungover. It’s just like, I 
like, can’t get up when my alarm goes off. I, physically, I’m just like, so 
tired. You know? 
HILL: Mm-hmm. 
BRITTANY: Which I don’t mean to be, but. 
HILL: Yeah. 
Just so that I can better help you, if you don’t mind just describing a 
typical day for me. That way, it just gives me insight into what’s maybe 
some of the other obstacles are. And so I have a worksheet here for a 
schedule, and let’s just take, for example, Monday class day, and what 
that typically looks like. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So when’s your first class—for this past semester, when was 
your first class? 
BRITTANY: 9:40 is when I start class on Mondays. 
HILL: OK. And what class is that? 
BRITTANY: Religion of America. 
HILL: OK. OK. And then do you have any other classes on Monday? 
BRITTANY: Yeah. Then at—let’s see. I think it’s like, 1:10. 9:40—
yeah. 1:10, I have Shamanism. 
HILL: OK. So a nice break in between. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: All right. And then any other classes on Monday? 
BRITTANY: Not on Mondays. 
HILL: OK. So your Religion of Americans—why did you decide to 
take that course? 
94
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
BRITTANY: It was just like one of the courses that was still available. 
Like, I feel like I kind of had a late registration, and like, I didn’t really 
know what else to take, and I’ve heard really good things about that 
professor. 
HILL: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. That specific course is actually an upper 
division course, and so that might be why you had some difficulty 
with that. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Usually when you’re taking a 300 or a 400-level course, you 
want your writing skills. You at least want your English composition 
course out of the way, because there’s a lot of [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. I’ve noticed that. Like, they’re all like, the older 
kids, and they kind of—I don’t know. It’s just like, it’s easier for them, 
I think. 
HILL: Mm-hmm. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Also with upper divisions there are sometimes prerequisites 
that aren’t—there’s no way in the system to prevent you from 
registering for a class with a prerequisite, and so that might be another 
problem, is they expected you to have a foundational knowledge 
before jumping into that one, and you just skipped that. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: And that’s where I come in. I help with the academic advising. 
And we can talk about that a little bit more later. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: The Sha- Shama- Shamanism—
BRITTANY: Shamanism. Yeah. 
HILL: —class, how was that class for you? 
BRITTANY: You know, it’s interesting, but like, I don’t know. Not 
exactly what I want to study. And again, it was like something that 
was free that fit in my schedule. But I don’t know, like—I don’t love 
the professor, and I mean, I’m not—I don’t want to be a Shaman, you 
95
Psychotherapy.net
know? 
HILL: Mm-hmm. 
BRITTANY: And I mean, those are both kind of like religious studies 
courses, and that’s not really my thing, so. 
HILL: OK. All right. 
JOHN: I noticed Selena doing some nice focusing or psychoeducation 
on the nature of maladaptive behaviors, and that’s really an important 
thing to focus on when you’re working with, I think, a young woman 
who’s struggled in college. 
RITA: Right. And I thought it was interesting to see her have 
Brittany talk about a typical day, and kind of start identifying those 
contingencies, and what was going wrong. It’s also classic that Brittany 
was in an upper classman class, and a class on Shamanism. And 
combine that with lack of good habits, or maybe some bad habits. 
JOHN: Selena also, in the upcoming segment, works on contracting, 
which is another behavioral approach, as well as behavioral problem-
solving—in other words, how can Brittany use some skills to use new 
and different behaviors and new contingencies to change her behavior 
in a positive direction? 
RITA: Let’s watch how that works. 
HILL: OK. So, as part of the reinstatement process, you have to 
agree to do some of these things. So it’s really important that you 
understand all—because this is basically a contract that helps you, 
that keeps you on track for what you should be doing in the fall, to 
help you be a successful student. 
BRITTANY: OK. So I can for sure come back in the fall? 
HILL: Actually, not for sure yet. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: What I’ll do is go through this plan with you, and then after 
that, we’ll call over to the dean’s office, get you an appointment with 
them. And they actually do the reinstatement. They’re the ones that 
decide. 
96
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So remember in the beginning I said it’s important that you’re 
really honest with me about everything. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: And the dean will ask the same, because what we want to do is 
make sure that you’re ready to be back in school, and that this is the, 
first of all, the right university for you and the right time for you to be 
here. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: And it’s not about keeping out of school or not about not 
wanting to encourage. It’s just about making sure it’s the right thing 
for you right now. 
BRITTANY: Right, yeah. 
HILL: It’s not a—I guess it’s not a form of punishment, but it’s 
definitely a process to make sure that you’re ready to be here. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: Do you have any other questions? 
BRITTANY: No. 
HILL: So just going back to the questionnaire. This part of the 
reinstatement plan is attending class, making sure that you attend all 
classes for the semester. And just reflecting back on the questionnaire 
that you had filled out at the beginning of our meeting, that was one 
of the problems that you identified, was your poor attendance. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. It’s probably the biggest problem. 
HILL: OK. And so what—and I know you talked about the social, 
being social with your friends and staying out late. Was there anything 
else that kept you from going to class? 
BRITTANY: So, yeah. Just sleeping in, and, I don’t know. I guess like, 
they don’t take attendance all the time, and I didn’t really think it was 
that big of a deal. Like, I mean, I don’t always miss class, so I just—I 
guess I didn’t think it was that big of a deal. And, I mean, sometimes 
it’s boring, and I’d rather do something else. Like when it’s nice out, 
97
Psychotherapy.net
I don’t want to go to that class, where I’m like, already not doing that 
well. 
HILL: OK. Going to class is very important, and I know it’s pretty easy 
not to do that. You’ve already talked about some of the obstacles that 
have—or the things that have prevented you from going to class. So I 
think this would be a great opportunity to brainstorm some possible 
solutions of you making sure that you make it to class, because we do, 
just in the different research, it shows students who attend class on a 
regular basis automatically do better than those who go occasionally. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: So and I want to come up with things that will work for you, 
not things that I think will work, but things that you can do. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: So maybe just thinking back to high school and the times 
where you did have your parents’s guidance on getting to school and 
the importance of that. What were some of the things that worked that 
you could now to here as a student, as a college student? 
BRITTANY: Well, I think for me, if I get up the same time every day, 
it’s easier. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: Because like I said, I don’t have to get up early on 
Tuesdays and Thursdays, and so it’s really hard on Mondays and 
Wednesdays. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: So maybe if I like, kind of got a pattern going so that it 
was easier. It’s just so hard. 
HILL: OK. And that—we can definitely try to build a schedule that 
meets that needs. What are maybe a couple other things that would 
help you make it to class regularly? 
BRITTANY: Um, well, not staying up as late would be helpful. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: It’s just hard, because I’m not really tired. Like, I’ll 
98
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
look at the clock, and I’ll see it’s like 11:30, midnight, but, I mean, 
it feels like it’s like 8:30 or 9:00. So I don’t know—maybe telling my 
roommate. Because like, she’s often like, the person that wants me to 
go to the University Center and get ice cream or like, watch a movie 
with her. And like, I’d like to, but it’s kind of like a sleepover every 
night. So maybe I could just like tell her that I can’t stay up late all the 
time. 
HILL: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. OK. So getting up at the same time each 
day, falling into that pattern, but also not staying up as late, which is 
also a sleep pattern. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: So it sounds like a lot of this is around you getting rest, and that 
is very important. So what are just some natural—just some things 
that you would do to make sure that you went to bed early? Because 
nobody else is—you know, I’m not going to be there in your dorm at 
9 o’clock at night or 10 o’clock at night, reminding you, oh, remember 
our agreement. What are some maybe just some things that you could 
do to monitor yourself and remind yourself that getting a good night’s 
rest is important? 
BRITTANY: I could maybe like, put an alarm in my cell phone at like, 
8:30, just like so I realize that it’s like, getting a little bit later. Because 
it kind of sneaks up on me sometimes, that it’s so late. And like, I’ve 
been taking a lot of naps. That’s the other problem. So I’ll like sleep in, 
and so I can’t like, go to class. I’m so tired. But I’ll get up, and then I’ll 
take like, a nap like 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon, and then I can’t go 
to bed early. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: So maybe like, just, like I could even like not take a nap 
once, then maybe I’d get in the right pattern, you know? 
HILL: So you’ve talked about patterns a lot, so that sounds like it’s a 
pretty—that’s what helps you function, is finding a pattern, finding a 
daily schedule. 
BRITTANY: Yeah, I guess that is kind of what it is. 
99
Psychotherapy.net
HILL: Mmm. And that’s human nature. I think we all work better 
if we kind of know what to expect and how to set a schedule up for 
ourselves. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: I know for me I have to have a to-do list each day at work, 
because I could be on email all day. But if I have a to-do list to follow, 
then that helps keep me organized for the day. So having your pattern. 
And what I’ll also do is send you with one of these weekly schedules. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: And you’ll also practice—this’ll be one of your assignments 
in the CNA Learning Strategies class is that you’ll map out your class 
schedule. Then you’ll also map out when you’ll eat, when you’ll study, 
if you are part of any intramurals or student activities, any of that, 
you’ll build that into there, but you’ll also build in your sleep time in 
there. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So you can visually see what your schedule looks like, even 
though you might not follow it to a T every day or even every week, it’s 
Kind of nice reminder of, oh, yeah, on Wednesday nights, I was going 
to try to make it to bed by 11 o’clock or whatever. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: Whatever’s necessary. So that sounds like a great list. And I will 
definitely—what I’ll do is add that to the reinstatement plan, because I 
will give you a copy of this so you remember what we talked about and 
you have it to refer to. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So the other thing that’s important is that, you know, you’ve 
come up with this list of strategies to make sure that you are making it 
to class on a regular basis. But it’s also important that if you’re able to 
achieve these that you reward yourself. 
BRITTANY: Mm-hmm. 
HILL: And sometimes it’s something simple like going out for ice 
100
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
cream with your friend when she asks you to. Other times it’s maybe 
something bigger—going out and buying yourself a pair of shoes or 
something. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: What maybe are some possible rewards that you could give 
yourself if you were able to follow this pattern that we talked about? 
BRITTANY: Um, well, maybe like me and my friends could go like, 
camping. We live like, pretty close to some good areas for that, so 
maybe we could go camping like at the end of the semester. 
HILL: OK. That sounds like a lot of fun. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. I think that would be fun. And ice cream’s always 
fun. And shoes. 
HILL: Yeah.  So we relate on that level. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. I totally get that. That sounds like fun, actually. 
HILL: So camping with friends at the end of the semester. A camping 
trip sounds like it would be very rewarding, and kind of that ultimate 
what’s keeping you motivated. 
BRITTANY: Mm-hmm. 
HILL: On a daily basis, though, you also kind of need some of those 
little motivators. So maybe what’s something—that’s a great overall 
goal to have. What’s maybe something you could do to reward 
yourself? 
BRITTANY: Maybe—well, me and my roommate like to like, 
marathon TV shows. So maybe we could like, watch an episode on the 
days I go to class. 
HILL: Nice. Yes. That’s a great idea. 
BRITTANY: But not too late.  
HILL: So build that into your weekly schedule. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Not after your bedtime. 
101
Psychotherapy.net
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Now I sound like a mom, using the whole bedtime term. 
BRITTANY:  Yeah, well, it’s easier. Like, I don’t need a bedtime if I’m 
tired. It’s just, I’m not getting tired at the right time, so. 
HILL: Yeah. And that will probably take you a while to get—because 
your body is now used to, you know, kind of having these late nights, 
late mornings. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: And so to readjust to all of that will take you some time. So 
don’t—I guess don’t be too hard on yourself if tonight you practice 
trying to go to bed at 11 and you’re not able to fall right asleep. It’ll 
take you a while. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: So definitely don’t be too hard on yourself. Change is always 
gradual. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: So we’ve talked about the overall consequences of maybe not 
following through with your plan. I think it’s really helpful, too, if you 
look at maybe some little consequences that you can give yourself if 
you miss a class. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: One example you used for a reward is watching one of your TV 
shows with your roommate. So maybe missing a class means you don’t 
watch the TV show with your roommate. What are maybe some of 
those smaller consequences you can give yourself? 
BRITTANY: Ugh, like going to the library. 
HILL: Ooh. 
BRITTANY: Like, maybe I would have to make myself go to the 
library for the amount of time that I was supposed to be in class. 
HILL: That is a great—
BRITTANY: That would not be fun. 
102
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
HILL: Going to the library. Let’s—maybe two more of those types of 
consequences. 
BRITTANY: So like, not watching the episode of whatever TV show. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: And I don’t know, maybe like scaling back of my 
weekend plans. 
HILL: OK. 
BRITTANY: Like taking one commitment out of the weekend that 
was something social I wanted to do. 
HILL: OK. Social plans. Those sound like very good and reasonable 
consequences for missing class. And you’ve kind of giving yourself a 
balance, too. You have some positive rewards, and then you have some 
consequences, as well. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: And they’re all doable, and they’re all things that, you know, 
that you can hold yourself accountable to and don’t really need 
anybody reminding you. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: Just to keep you on track with your plan of getting into a 
pattern in your schedule, one of the things I want you to do is a self-
monitoring assignment—nothing that’s going to take a lot of time, 
just mainly keeping track of when you’re going to bed at night and 
things like that so you can see what pattern you are in now. And so try 
to find those times of night that will give you enough time to get a full 
night’s rest. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So let me give you this schedule. I’m going to give you this 
worksheet here. And you can just keep track of your bedtimes and 
what your schedule’s like. And then you can also start—I’m going to 
give you a note pad, and you can also start logging down, from here 
on out, when you’re going to bed and what not. That way, we have 
something visual to go back to when we meet again to check on your 
103
Psychotherapy.net
progress, just to see if you’ve come up with your own pattern. 
BRITTANY: Yeah. 
HILL: Or you’ll be able to identify, you know, oh, I’m always going to 
bed at midnight, and then I’m missing class that next day. 
BRITTANY: Right. 
HILL: So you can identify that yourself. 
BRITTANY: OK. So just keep track of like, when I’m going to bed and 
then when I’m missing class. 
HILL: Yeah. Yeah. 
BRITTANY: But I can’t miss any more class. 
HILL: Yes. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: Yes, that would be the ultimate goal, for sure. Do you have any 
questions about that? 
BRITTANY: I don’t think so. I mean, do I have to bring it back to you? 
HILL: Yes. Yeah. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: Because that’ll help me do some more brainstorming if need be 
for getting you back on track and finding that pattern that you’ve been 
talking about, so. 
BRITTANY: OK. Yeah, that sounds good. 
HILL: OK. So I’ll go ahead and give you that worksheet there. 
BRITTANY: And so I’ll talk to the dean, and then will you let me 
know whether—
HILL: Actually the dean tells you right then and there whether you’re 
reinstated or not. 
BRITTANY: OK. 
HILL: So you’ll know by the time you’re done meeting with her. 
BRITTANY: OK. All right. 
104
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
RITA: So John, that’s a great case for a focus on rewards and 
contingencies—very clearly applicable to Brittany’s situation. 
JOHN: Absolutely, yeah. And I liked Selena using the self-monitoring 
assignment toward the end of the video segment, probably because the 
research is really good that self-monitoring is a nice assessment, from 
the behavioral perspective, but also it’s an intervention in and of itself. 
RITA: Right. And there’s that little consequence of having to go talk 
to a dean. So I really think this is a great demonstration of behavioral 
therapy and how it can make a big difference for people like Brittany. 
This session is an example of cognitive-behavioral therapy with John, 
who is, actually, also one of my favorite therapists, working with a 
client name Meredith. 
JOHN: Thank you so much. 
RITA: You’re welcome. 
JOHN: CBT, as it’s popularly called in the literature, is similar to 
behavior therapy in that it focuses on learning theories with the 
real specific focus in the session being what are the maladaptive or 
irrational cognitions and what are the maladaptive or unhelpful 
behaviors that the client is engaging in. 
RITA: Right. And when you work within the realm of cognitive 
or cognitive-behavioral, it can be a very gentle, very collaborative 
process—sort of like Aaron Beck. 
JOHN: And I like that approach, but also it could be a little more 
abrasive and forceful, like Albert Ellis’s rational-emotive behavior 
therapy, and his tendency to dispute or to use disputation to push 
people out of their irrational thinking. 
RITA: So in this session that we’re about to watch, John uses a very 
standard cognitive-behavioral opening, and he make a problem list. 
JOHN: And in this particular segment, we don’t see Meredith list any 
more problems than the first one, because that’s the one we chose to 
work on. 
RITA: He also uses the classics three-column cognitive-behavioral 
technique, working with the problem of shyness that she’s 
105
Psychotherapy.net
experiencing. 
JOHN: All right. So let’s take a look. 
RITA: OK. 
JOHN: Well, Meredith, we know each other, but the way we usually 
start a CBT session is to set an agenda. 
MEREDITH: OK. 
JOHN: And so we might have several ideas about what we want on 
the agenda, but the first thing is usually for us to make a problem list 
together about whatever it that you might want to work on. 
MEREDITH: OK. 
JOHN: And then we’ll do the problem list, and then we’ll explore 
the thoughts and the behaviors that might be related to the problem. 
And hopefully by the end of our time together, we’ll have a clear idea 
about what’s causing the problem and some ideas about how to maybe 
change things. 
MEREDITH: Sounds good. 
JOHN: All right. 
MEREDITH: So, one thing that I’ve been noticing lately is that I 
have a tendency to kind of hang back in groups, and I tend to observe 
instead of participate. 
JOHN: OK. 
MEREDITH: And, a lot of times, I get really nervous when I feel like 
I’m expected to speak up. And I want to speak up, but I kind of feel 
like I freeze. 
JOHN: OK. And so in particular then, in groups, the setting is big 
groups, little groups? Does it matter? 
MEREDITH: It doesn’t matter a whole lot, but generally, I guess, 
medium-size—like, you know, in classes that I have. They’re usually 
like maybe 12 people or so. So relatively small, medium. I don’t know 
what size that is. 
JOHN: OK. And so but in your head, you probably would say, I would 
106
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
like to speak up, but, for some reason, you feel inside some anxiety or 
nervousness about that. 
MEREDITH: Definitely. 
JOHN: OK. 
MEREDITH: And then sometimes when I try to force myself to speak 
up when I actually don’t feel ready, I get like, I feel like my throat’s 
closing, and I get a red face.  
JOHN: OK. All right. So that’s sort of one possible issue for issue for 
us to talk about. 
Could you maybe give me a specific example of a particular group 
situation, as recent as you can, where you had this feeling of hanging 
back and maybe some fear of evaluation. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. So in my statistics class, each week we 
have a—it’s called an inclusion activity. And generally, I guess, that’s 
supposed to help people feel like the group’s more cohesive and 
included. But I usually experience it as the opposite. So there’s usually 
a task at the beginning of each class of, like, take off your shoe and talk 
about the most interesting place your shoe has been. Stuff like that.  
JOHN: In stats. 
MEREDITH: Yeah. That—usually I get really nervous, and I feel like 
I can’t think of anything to say. And I feel like I usually end up saying 
something really awkward or lame, and I just don’t feel good about it. 
Like, I feel—
JOHN: Yeah. Can you give me that specific example of the recent time 
when maybe—and what you said, too, including sort of the beginning, 
what happened, and then how it ended. 
MEREDITH: Yeah. So when we did this activity— it’s like a really 
weird example. 
JOHN: Yeah. All right. 
MEREDITH: When we did this activity, probably six or seven people 
had gone in front of me, and I was like, not listening to anything that 
anyone else was saying, just total self-absorbed in terms of like, oh 
107
Psychotherapy.net
God, what am I going to say, and not being able to think of anything. 
And then when it was my turn, I was wearing a pair of shoes that like, 
are, kind of like, they have lace on them. 
And so I took it off and I said, I like these shoes because I get cool tan 
lines from them. So I didn’t even really answer the question that was 
like, where have these shoes been, or like the coolest place these shoes 
have been, or something like that. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
MEREDITH: And then after I went, I didn’t really listen to anything 
else anyone said, because I was still like, stuck on why didn’t I answer 
the question? And just kind of feeling awkward. 
JOHN: OK. So what I’m doing here is I’ve got several columns that I’m 
building. And the first one is you’re in the stats class, and you’re going 
through and inclusion activity. And the second one is the thoughts 
that you’re having, OK? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: What thoughts are going through your mind. And the 
thoughts are, oh God, what am I going to saying? Those are the early 
thoughts. And then maybe later thoughts are, why didn’t I even 
answer the question? 
MEREDITH: Yeah. And like, why can’t I ever be articulate? 
JOHN: OK. Why can’t I ever be articulate? OK. And then our third 
column are the emotions that you might be feeling. And so as you’re 
in that situation and people are taking their turn—the teacher says, 
you’re doing the inclusion activity. People are taking their turns. And 
what are you feeling? How would you describe your emotional state? 
MEREDITH: Mmm. Nervous. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
MEREDITH: Yeah. Like, fearful. 
JOHN: OK. 
MEREDITH: And, like, it’s almost like I’m anticipating 
embarrassment. 
108
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
MEREDITH: So I don’t know if that’s a feeling or not, but usually I 
feel embarrassed. 
JOHN: I put that in the thought column. 
MEREDITH: OK. 
JOHN: Just because it seems like the anticipation of it is probably 
a thought, but embarrassment, when you’re in the middle of it, is 
probably a feeling. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Does that make sense? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And then so I got nervous, fearful, embarrassed as the 
emotions. And on a scale of zero, not at all, 100 being the most of 
that feeling you could ever have, how would you rate—let’s get rid of 
nervous, because it’s sort of covered by fearful. How would you rate 
fearful and how would you rate embarrassed? 
MEREDITH: Mmm, maybe fearful like, a four. 
MEREDITH: OK. 
MEREDITH: Or a five. I don’t know. 
JOHN: A 4 or a 5 out of 100? 
MEREDITH: Or I mean 45.  
JOHN: OK, I was going to say. Oh, feeling pretty calm. So a 40 or a 50. 
MEREDITH: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. And embarrassed? 
MEREDITH: I’d say that’s higher. 
JOHN: A little higher. 
MEREDITH: Yeah, like a 70. 
JOHN: So maybe a 70. And that would be at the moment that you’re 
talking, or right afterwards, or right before? Does it fluctuate at all? 
109
Psychotherapy.net
MEREDITH: Yeah. I’d say like, both during and after.  
JOHN: Mm-hmm. OK. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: OK. So during and after. All right. And so you know the 
cognitive approach to thinking about what’s going on is that it’s not 
the situation that causes the emotional reaction, but it’s what you’re 
thinking that causes the emotional reaction. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so it seems to me like one of the things that’s going on—
oh God, what am I going to say, and why I didn’t I answer? Why can I 
never be articulate? 
MEREDITH:  Why can’t I never be articulate. That sounds exactly 
like—
JOHN: Yeah. It’s perfect. 
MEREDITH:  
JOHN: We might have to start rating my anxiety now, too. And 
then I guess there’s the other thing. You said that you’re anticipating 
embarrassment. And so are those words too also that are going 
through your head? 
MEREDITH: Yeah. Like, I wish I could be more clever or, I wish I 
could have just like a funny story right now or make people laugh in a 
way that I want them to laugh. 
JOHN: In the preceding segment, obviously Meredith is a very 
interesting young woman. And she talks a lot about some what 
might be considered irrational thoughts or maladaptive thoughts. In 
particular, we get to see a little glimpse of what she does that is black-
white thinking or dichotomous thinking. 
RITA: Right. Right. And she comes along with the process, even 
though obviously she’s even kind of shy in the session, and nervous. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
RITA: Yeah. So in the next section, we can watch as you focus more on 
that black and white thinking that’s getting her in trouble. 
110
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Right. And I also take a look at and try to point out helpful 
verses unhelpful thoughts. And I find that that’s a good language to 
use with clients when you’re using cognitive therapy, because they 
naturally kind of get a sense that, yeah, some thoughts are less helpful. 
Some thoughts are more helpful. And in the upcoming segment, I 
actually do that in the here and now. It happens in the room. I get a 
chance to point that out to Meredith. 
RITA: Great. So let’s take a look at that. 
JOHN: And one of the things I’m doing now is a lot of times, when 
you think about the thoughts that trigger the emotions, these are the 
thoughts that we would categorize as less helpful. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: OK? Kind of unhelpful thoughts. And then over here what 
we’re doing is we’re coming up with some thoughts that might be 
more helpful. OK? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Recognizing that no thoughts are perfect, but some thoughts 
are more helpful. Some thoughts are less helpful. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And you know in your stats class, you’re going to do the 
inclusion activity—
MEREDITH: Every week. 
JOHN: Every week. And so one possibility is you could come in 
prepared to shift your thinking from the less helpful to the more 
helpful. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Just an idea. 
MEREDITH: That’s a good idea. 
JOHN: OK. So what else besides this is silly and what I say doesn’t 
matter all that much? 
MEREDITH: Um, I can be clever sometimes. 
111
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: I can be clever sometimes. Good. That’s sort of a counter to 
the why can’t I ever be articulate—or why can’t I never be articulate. 
MEREDITH:  
JOHN: Either way you say it. Well, let’s pretend for a second that you 
were talking to a friend who had exactly this same scenario. And 
she was telling you the way that she talks to yourself—oh God, what 
am I going to say? And why can’t I answer that? Why can’t I ever be 
articulate? I know I’m going to embarrass myself. And so she’s talking 
to herself that way. How would you talk to her? 
MEREDITH: I think that I’d probably express surprise, because 
I imagine that usually I don’t perceive her as inarticulate or as 
embarrassing as she sees himself. 
JOHN: OK. So you would be surprised and kind of reassuring to her, 
and say, oh, you don’t seem that way. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And if you could be on her shoulder in the situation, what 
would you whisper in her ear? 
MEREDITH: Hmm. 
JOHN: This is a good friend of yours. You want to be helpful. 
MEREDITH:  I would tell her to that, um, she’s funny and charming 
and usually has really cool stories to tell, because she’s had lots of good 
experiences. 
JOHN: Hmm. So you’d be sitting on her shoulder saying things like, 
you are funny, and charming, and you have cool stories to tell. Hmm. 
What’s it feel like when you imagine actually even saying those words 
to yourself in this kind of situation? 
MEREDITH: I mean, it sounds pretty ideal, but it sounds really far 
away from my current experience. 
JOHN: It’s not what you’re whispering in your own ear. 
MEREDITH: No. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. What would stop you from actually doing this, 
from talking to yourself just like you would talk to a good friend? 
112
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
Because you’re talking to yourself—you’re kind of talking to yourself 
more like somebody who wanted to pull you down. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so I just think, oh, what about that good friend? I mean, 
can you be a good friend to yourself in those moments and say 
something more supportive? 
You are a pretty successful in a variety of different things in your life. 
Right? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so if you take one of those examples and you kind of 
break it down, are you able to—what do you do to prepare? Well, for 
example, even for a statistics test, I would guess that you have to go 
through some preparation. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Study. 
JOHN: You study. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: OK. Kind of like studying—have you ever been in like a play 
or a dramatic performance of any type? 
MEREDITH: Oh, no. I avoid that. 
JOHN:  Totally. Not even like in grade school? 
MEREDITH: No. I think I maybe was in seventh grade. 
JOHN: Yeah? 
MEREDITH: Yeah. But I had a very small part. I’ve always, like, my 
whole life, shied away from being the center of attention. It never feels 
good to me. 
JOHN: No. 
MEREDITH: Which is ironic, since I’m going to school to become a 
teacher. 
JOHN:  Yeah. So you have taught before and spoken in front of 
groups. 
113
Psychotherapy.net
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Small, medium. 
MEREDITH: Yeah. 
JOHN: What do you do—
MEREDITH: But it never feels. 
JOHN: Well, it never feels comfortable, perfectly. 
MEREDITH: No. Nuh uh. No. Yeah, I—
JOHN: So even right now, as we’re talking. OK? 
MEREDITH: Uh huh. 
JOHN: So I hear you say it never feels comfortable, right? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Would you put that thought in the category of helpful or 
unhelpful, to say that to yourself? 
MEREDITH: I’d say that’s unhelpful. 
JOHN: Unhelpful. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: OK. What’s unhelpful about that thought? 
MEREDITH: Mmm. It kind of makes me feel like no matter how 
much I prepare, I still won’t feel like I’m good enough or competent, 
or. 
JOHN: Yeah, and just before that, you said I always shied away from 
attention. It’s never felt good. 
MEREDITH: It’s some pretty black and white thinking. 
JOHN: Well, that is pretty—yeah, good job noticing that. 
MEREDITH:  Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And I hear you saying that black and white thinking is maybe 
too general in that it doesn’t provide any real hope for it ever changing. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
114
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: And in that sense, it does seem like it fits in that unhelpful 
category. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. I mean, I definitely think like, you know, 
if you’re nervous about something, to a certain extent, that’s healthy, 
because it makes you prepare more. But at the same time, that kind 
of thinking of being like it will never get better, it will never be OK 
probably isn’t that helpful. 
JOHN: Yeah. Yeah. So I wonder if that’s maybe as we think about the 
preparation stage, that that’s one of the things that you said for a stats 
test you would study. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: I wonder if there’s some way you could study this way that 
you have been thinking about yourself. I’m just not clever in a group. 
I’m just not comfortable. I’ve always shied away from that. I wonder if 
there would be different ways you could say things to yourself. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. For instance? 
JOHN: For instance. 
MEREDITH: There are times when I am comfortable in groups. 
JOHN: There are times I am comfortable in groups. And that you 
probably would put into the more helpful thought category. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: So it seems like you’ve got this sort of a circle of thinking 
in there that takes you down into a negative place, that the 
embarrassment kind of starts this negative spiral. It takes you 
downward to—you’re probably not consciously thinking I’ll be alone 
and unhappy, but somehow it’s related. People will think you’re stupid. 
They won’t want to be around you. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, and I feel like I, um—like 
not really on purpose, but I end up doing things to like, make myself 
not seen, like kind of invisible. And then usually I don’t feel like that’s 
as rewarding when I feel engaged and involved in a group. 
JOHN: It kind of backfires, and you probably feel more lonely and 
115
Psychotherapy.net
unhappy based on withdrawing and being more invisible. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Definitely. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. And so you hold that belief of, if I do something 
embarrassing, it will go down that spiral. I’ll be alone unhappy despite 
the fact that you told me just a couple minutes ago that you had a very 
embarrassing experience that now has added to your repertoire as a 
good storyteller. It’s another story you can tell. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Yes. 
JOHN: So you can see that I’m questioning the evidence, and I wonder 
if you are questioning it too, or if you’re just thinking, I better go along 
with this for now. 
MEREDITH: No. I definitely think that you’re right. I just, like, 
hearing you say that I’m a good storyteller, that’s so not my 
experience. I don’t think I’m a good storyteller, so it’s hard for me just 
to say, sure. But I agree with the evidence part. 
JOHN: There is evidence that you have told some good stories. 
MEREDITH: Yes. 
JOHN: You’re not sure you would conclude that that therefore makes 
you a good storyteller. 
MEREDITH: Exactly. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. So sometimes you are a good storyteller, and 
sometimes you’re a less good storyteller. 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so I can hear it sounds like you’re very careful about 
coming to any positive conclusions about yourself, but you’re much 
less cautious—
MEREDITH:  
JOHN: You’re much less cautious. You’re more of a risk-taker when it 
comes to jumping to negative conclusions about yourself. Would you 
say that’s—
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. Yeah, I would say that’s accurate. 
116
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: And so as we kind of head down sort of toward the end of our 
meeting today, I’m thinking about, well, what might be some useful 
things for you to try, experiment with, to see if it’s helpful for you in 
coping with this situationally-based problem? 
MEREDITH: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Rita, I really like using that third-person technique as a 
method for helping clients talk to themselves more gently. And then 
I really like the idea of her actually being her own shoulder and 
whispering kind and supportive and positive things in her ear instead 
of the critical things that she often was whispering to herself. 
RITA: Right. Well, you were very gentle and encouraging, and I think 
that helped her actually reveal even more extreme black and white 
thinking that she’s subjecting herself to. 
JOHN: Yeah. In the end, this should help her automatically question 
her automatic thoughts a little bit more than she did in the past. And I 
have confidence. In fact, she said at the end of the session, she thought 
that this would be helpful to her in the future. 
RITA: This next session is focused on reality therapy techniques, 
which, of course, were developed by William Glasser. And you know, 
John, some people hear the term reality therapy and I think they 
decide that it’s very confrontational, which, actually, it isn’t. 
JOHN: Right. You know, it is not. I think people get confused. They 
think, reality. Make people face reality. And, you know, this is an 
interesting therapy approach that it looks like it has some existential 
roots. It also has a feel of being very Adlerian in the way it’s used. 
RITA: That’s true. 
JOHN: The focus is on concrete behaviors and concrete thoughts that 
clients have control over. 
RITA: Right. 
JOHN: And that’s very important. There’s a big emphasis on self-
evaluation. Robert Wubbolding, who’s a leader in the area, says that 
that’s really kind of the most important piece of reality therapy. He 
also emphasizes planning and specific planning. And really reality 
117
Psychotherapy.net
therapy can be captured, I think, in the four big reality therapy 
questions originally developed by Glasser or but articulate also by 
Wubbolding. And those are what do you want? What are you doing? Is 
it working? And should you make a new plan? 
RITA: So in this set that we’re going to watch, John is working with 
Sidra, who’s struggling with back pain. And we’ll watch to see how 
those big four questions actually come into the session. So let’s watch. 
JOHN: I’m wondering if we had a session today that was positive for 
you in that you were able to feel that we’ve accomplished something 
important to you. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: What would that look like? 
SIDRA: There are a thousand things in my mind right now. I don’t 
know which one I should say. Mmm. 
JOHN: There are a lot of things that are important to you, and so it’s 
hard to choose just one. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Mmm. Maybe let’s start with my back pain, and then 
maybe we’ll go somewhere. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. So one thing then, if we were to have a successful 
session, it would be important, it would mean something to you, that 
we might move in a positive direction regarding your back pain. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. OK. Yeah. Like in my brain, I always talk with 
myself. Though I’m not—it’s not like I’m crazy or something, but it’s 
like, when you don’t have people around you, you usually talk with 
yourself.  
JOHN: Right. 
SIDRA: So, yeah. I live by myself, and I usually talk, oh, I should do 
that while I’m doing that. So, like in my brain, I’m talking with myself, 
so. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. I should do that. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And yet it doesn’t happen. And you know, Sidra, it’s my job, 
118
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
because I think you’ve identified something that really does mean 
something to you. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And it’s my job to kind of be a little pushy—
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: —and to have you focus on really what can you do? How do 
you—how do you, a very intelligent young woman, figure out a clear 
schedule to exercise in the ways that are going to make your back 
better? 
SIDRA: Mmm. I’m should sleep on time in the night, wake up early 
morning, and then I can do that. Then I don’t have that, excuse that 
I’m tired and I want to sleep or something. 
JOHN: OK. 
SIDRA: So I think that’s the way I can do and organize the thing. 
JOHN: So you think it’s better to wake up early in the morning and—
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. Yeah. So. But I’m a night person. That’s the 
problem.  
JOHN: Ah. So you like to stay up late and then sleep in. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. And then wake up like, 9:30ish. But if I have to go 
to work early morning, then 7:30 or 8:30. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SIDRA: But waking up at like five every day,  it’s so hard for me. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: Yeah. So. 
JOHN: So as you evaluate yourself, as you can look at your own 
behavior, you’re pretty clear that you could do better with this. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Someday. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
119
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: And so I’m all about trying to figure out, well, how do you do 
this better? And so getting to bed earlier, but, you’re a night person. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. Actually I improved a little bit. I was like really a 
night person—go to bed around 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning. But now 
like 12:00 is like, maximum. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: So maybe if I just like, focus on that, I can do better and go 
to bed like at 10:00 or 11:00, so maybe then I can wake up a good 
morning actually. 
JOHN: OK. So what do you think the odds are of you actually 
achieving that as you talk about it—changing yourself from being a 
night person to getting to bed at 10 or 11. What are the odds of that 
working out? 
SIDRA: Mmm. [QUIETLY] I really hate it. 
JOHN: I think you may be kind of tricking yourself with that 
particular solution. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Like, I want to sleep. It’s like, OK, I should sleep now, 
because I have to wake up early morning. But something, like maybe 
my brain or heart or something, is saying, like, no, it’s OK. You can do 
it. Oh, you have plenty of time, like five, six hours sleep is fine. 
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SIDRA: So that’s the thing. So it’s like, OK, it’s fine, I can just stay up 
until maybe 12 or 1:00. 
JOHN: Or 1:00. 
SIDRA: And then I can sleep. And then in the week, like, I’m OK, but 
weekends. Oh. I just like, stay say up until 2:00, talk with friends or 
family. And so that just changed my schedule again, so. 
JOHN: Well, yeah. It sounds like one of the hard things is that you 
really value the time late at night. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so since you value it that much, it’s hard for you just to 
say, I’m given that up. It means something to you. 
120
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: And so it just doesn’t seem right to say, ah, Sidra, stop that 
and go to bed at 11:00. And that hasn’t worked very well for you in the 
past. You’ve tried that quite a lot. And so then I think to myself, well, 
maybe we should talk about what time during the day—let’s say you 
stay up until midnight or 1:00, which is normal for you. You enjoy 
that. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: It’s important to you. If you give yourself permission to do 
that, can you then organize your day to include the exercise that’s 
going to make a difference? 
SIDRA: Yes, I can. I mean, that I can come from work and like, done 
with the day, and then I can do my exercise or yoga. But then again, 
I was like, tired, time to watch TV, or maybe cooking time. It’s just 
like, I just don’t want to do that, so I maybe start cooking, though I’m 
super tired. 
JOHN: So once a day for 30 minutes or 45 minutes? 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. Yeah. 
JOHN: Which would be better for you? 
SIDRA: Mmm, I think 45 minutes. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: And so 45 minutes. And then how long does it take you to get 
ready to—I mean, if you get up at six and you were going to exercise 
for 45 minutes, would you be able to make it to work by 7:30? 
SIDRA: Yes. It only takes me like 10, 15 minutes to get ready, so. 
JOHN: Ah. So, you could get up at 6:30. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And still have time to exercise 45 minutes and get to work at 
7:30? Or 6:15? 
SIDRA: Yeah. It can be possible. 
121
Psychotherapy.net
JOHN: Mm-hmm. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: So let’s say 6:15. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And then what’s going to get in the way of you getting up at 
6:15? 
SIDRA: Mmm, nothing. At that time, I’ll be like, OK. Now I’m up. I 
can do that. 
JOHN: OK. 
SIDRA: The only thing is like leave my bed, and then, after that, I can 
do like all stuff. And then I’ll be fine. 
JOHN: Ah. 
SIDRA: The only thing is that. 
JOHN: You are very creative. Tell me some ways you can get yourself 
out of bed. 
SIDRA: Well, we have a morning prayer, which should be—in 
summer, it’s like, should be around like 5:00, 5:30. We have to do that. 
And in winter, it’s like 8:30, because of the sun. 
If I promise myself that I have to wake up early morning to say my 
prayer on time, then I think I can do that. 
JOHN: Do you do that? Do you get up in the morning and do your—
SIDRA: I’m not so good at it. 
JOHN: Not all the time. 
SIDRA: Not all the time. But especially in Ramadan I can do that, so 
I always like, wake up for, for my breakfast kind of thing, so at that 
time, yeah. I can do that. Like in Ramadan, I’m really organized. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: So it should be like Ramadan whole year, I think. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
122
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
SIDRA: So. 
JOHN: Huh. And because that’s very important to you—the Ramadan 
celebration. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And the prorcess. 
SIDRA: And the fasting and everything, yeah. 
JOHN: The fasting. OK. Hmm. What is it about that that gets you out 
of bed to do the morning prayers? 
SIDRA: I don’t know. I It’s kind of like, passion I would say. Like, oh, 
I have to do that, because it’s a really important thing, and I want to 
make God happy, and I have to. It’s kind of like that. So. 
JOHN: So you develop during that time of year some passion and 
commitment and desire to make God happy, and so then you get 
yourself up. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. Yeah. 
JOHN: Pretty much always? 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. Yeah, always. 
RITA: At the end of this segment, John is very persistent in his 
confrontations of Sidra. 
JOHN: Right. And I think it’s important to think about how the 
confrontations are framed. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: It’s not like I’m harshly confronting her because of something I 
think she should do. 
RITA: Right. 
JOHN: Really the focus from the reality therapy perspective is, what 
do you want, Sidra? Do you want to have a healthier back? And as long 
as she’s committed to that, then it’s my job—maybe in some ways, 
like a coach—to say, hey, do you want this, Sidra? If so, here are some 
things that you might be able to do, and to get her to volunteer some 
things that she might do to improve her situation, as well. 
123
Psychotherapy.net
And I really like the sequence when I pushed her and I pushed her, and 
finally she smiles at me and says, well, that’s why I’m here. 
RITA: Right. In this next section, we get to watch John use his 
amazing art skills to draw and illustrate the use of the reality therapy 
car. 
JOHN: Now Sidra, a couple of things about the kind of counseling or 
therapy that we’re doing. One is that, as it turns out, there are some 
things you have control over, and some things you have less control 
over. Would you say that that seems true? 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: So I’m going to just draw a little picture here on my clipboard 
that illustrates what you do have more control over and less control 
over. 
SIDRA: OK. 
JOHN: And so I’m not a very good drawer, and so I want you to, I 
guess, have patience with my drawing ability. 
SIDRA: OK. 
JOHN: But I’m drawing four wheels here. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And then I’m going to put a car on it. So it’s sort of like we’re 
looking at a car from up in the air. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And there’s the steering wheel of a car, and there’s an engine. 
OK. And according to this perspective, there are what they call front 
wheel behaviors and rear wheel behaviors. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And so the front wheel behaviors are your thoughts. 
SIDRA: OK. 
JOHN: And your actions. OK. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
124
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Those are things that you more or less have control over. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: So, for example, when you said you lie in bed and you think, 
oh, maybe I don’t need to get up and exercise. That’s an example of 
your thoughts, and you’re aware of them, and you know you can 
change them sometimes, right? 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: They’re kind of hard and tricky to change, but you can. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: And actions—the actual getting up. You got up and you got 
here. 
SIDRA: Yeah.  
JOHN: Right? 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: I mean, that’s an example. You have some control over that. 
Again, we’re all human. We don’t have perfect control over those 
things, but we have quite a bit of control. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And back here, we have feelings and we have physiology. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And the feelings are like, anger, sadness—emotions. And the 
physiology—in your case, the physiology is really important, because 
you have said that your back pain is one thing that is important to you 
to change. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: It’s a rear wheel behavior in that if you direct your actions and 
your thoughts points toward the goal of a healthy back, right, because 
that’s important to you now and in the future—
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: The physiology will follow. 
125
Psychotherapy.net
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Just like a car, right? I mean, you turn the front wheels. 
SIDRA: The back wheels follow. 
JOHN: The back wheels follow. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Exactly. And so what we really want to do in our time together, 
and what we’ve done a bit of already is to focus on your thoughts, 
focus on your actions, and to be very specific about the thoughts and 
the actions that lead you towards a healthy back. 
SIDRA: OK. 
JOHN: And then, and this might be one of the most important things 
of all, is to make a really good plan for how you can control those 
thoughts and actions to the best of your ability, to lead the physiology, 
the back pain, in the right direction. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Does that make sense to you? 
SIDRA: Yeah. It does. 
JOHN: So when we think about the back pain, what thoughts and 
actions do you think of as being most important to take you toward 
that healthy back goal? 
SIDRA: Just be careful, as I am right now. But I would say my back 
really needs care, and I should be gentle with that. Like if I’m sitting, 
I should sit like straight, rather than to be like this or something. Or 
with a back—I should have like, some support. And also doing yoga. 
And, eat healthy. 
JOHN: OK. So be careful in that make sure that your posture is good. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Maybe—you mentioned earlier about not lifting something 
too heavy. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Yeah. 
126
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Those kinds of things. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And then eat healthy and do yoga. Those three—
SIDRA: Three things. Or maybe also, I’m kind of like a person—if I 
start something, I just really want to finish that thing, like right away.  
I have no tolerance, I would say—bad thing. So maybe I should start 
focusing on that. So if I start something, I can do it tomorrow. So just 
not like be hard on myself when I I want to do that. 
JOHN: Yeah. Somehow what I’m hearing there is that that’s maybe 
more the thoughts. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Obviously these are actions. Be careful, eat healthy, do yoga. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And then the thoughts are, this is really important to me. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: I want a healthy back. I want to be away from pain. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: What I’m doing right now is I’m thinking, how do we make 
this even a better plan? How do we make it so that—and I like the 
idea of doubling or tripling up the important things to you, prayer, 
exercise, breakfast. But then I think, are there other things that can 
make it even more strong of a pull for you to accomplish these things? 
And you’re saying no, and I’m continuing to sort of think, hmm. 
SIDRA: Maybe.  
JOHN: Maybe. I just think, well, what makes it easier to exercise? 
What makes it more motivating, simpler? And when you exercise, are 
you doing yoga? 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: Is that right? Do you do a routine, specific exercises? 
SIDRA: Specific, just for my back. I cannot do like all of those, 
127
Psychotherapy.net
otherwise it will start hurting me. 
JOHN: Right. So you have a set of yoga exercises. And you do them in 
the same order each time? 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: And are they written down or are they in a book or on a video 
or—
SIDRA: It was on a video, but now I remember them, how to do that. 
So I don’t need the video. 
JOHN: You don’t need the video anymore. 
SIDRA: Yeah.  
JOHN:  Do you like the video? 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Yeah? 
SIDRA: It was fun. 
JOHN: Does that make it more likely to happen or less likely to 
happen, if you’ve got the video in the video machine and ready to roll 
at 6:00. Well, when you go to bed, it’s sitting there right ready. Does 
that make it easier or harder? 
SIDRA: Think so, easy. 
JOHN: Maybe? 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: So the video sitting out or in the machine might actually help, 
too. 
SIDRA: Yeah. I think so. 
JOHN: OK. And that’s kind of what we’re looking at right now, is what 
makes it more likely to happen? What makes it less likely to happen? 
Even the tiny little details of setting—I don’t know if it’s a video or a 
DVD or whatever it is. But would it be better if it was in the machine 
or sitting out so you can see it? 
SIDRA: I think in the machine. I can just play. 
128
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: Yeah. Just push Play and start. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: OK. When would you put it in the machine? You can I’m a 
very picky—
SIDRA:  I can do it today. 
JOHN: You could go home and put it in the machine so that it’s ready 
to roll. 
SIDRA: Yeah. And put the cover on the table so I know something is 
in the machine. So I have to do that. 
JOHN: Yeah. Here’s a really funny question for you. 
SIDRA: Uh huh. 
JOHN: How will you remember from this moment to when you get 
home that you want to put the yoga video? 
SIDRA: My memory’s so good.  
JOHN: You will not forget that? 
SIDRA: No.  
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: I never forget things, it’s just like, I don’t want to do that.  
JOHN:  So you might get home and say, I don’t want to do that, but 
you will remember it. 
SIDRA: Yeah. Yeah, my memory’s so good. 
JOHN: How will you get yourself home and say, I want to do that? 
SIDRA: I have an excuse. I have to go work right after that.  But yeah, 
when I will be back, then I can do that. 
JOHN: Yeah. 
SIDRA: Mm-hmm. 
JOHN: And how do you get yourself—you will remember, you’ll get 
home from work, and you will remember. 
SIDRA: I know I’m going to do that for sure today, because we are 
129
Psychotherapy.net
talking too much about that thing. I know I am doing that today. 
JOHN: So in some ways, this will help with the motivation. 
SIDRA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Is it maybe we have an arrangement? I mean, we have an 
agreement that you will do that? 
SIDRA: Yeah. Mm-hmm. That can be—yeah. 
RITA: So in this last section that we just saw, John, you got a little 
detail-oriented. 
JOHN: Right. I’m trying to follow that reality therapy rule of a specific 
plan is a better plan. And so that’s what I’m doing, and I’m also trying 
to engage Sidra in how do you make a better plan for yourself? 
RITA: Right, which is something I think she probably really needs 
some help with. And you make an agreement with her. 
JOHN: Right. At the end of the session—and I think this is a positive 
thing in terms of moving her to the future. Sometimes reality 
therapists are willing to make an agreement to serve as a reminder or a 
support person in the client’s life. 
RITA: Which I think, in this case, is going to be very effective for 
Sidra. 
JOHN: This next session is an example of feminist counseling, or 
feminist psychotherapy. Rita is the counselor, and you’re working with 
a woman named Amanda on some life decisions that she’s facing. 
RITA: Right. Right. Feminist therapy, in a nutshell, almost always 
includes a critique of power and of oppression in the culture. And, you 
know, the truth is it’s just as damaging to males as it is for females. 
JOHN: And consistent with that concept, feminist theory suggests 
that the root of pathology or psychopathology is not in the individual, 
but in the culture. 
RITA: Right. 
JOHN: And some of the distorted ways in which—and usually a 
paternalistic culture—might be affecting or oppressing individuals. 
And so the listening focuses on how is the culture affecting the 
130
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
individual who’s in counseling? What ways maybe has the individual 
internalized some of the cultural forces, and maybe even is oppressing 
himself or herself? 
RITA: Yeah. That’s true. Feminist therapists use pretty much every 
possible technique, but they almost always use self-disclosure, and 
they use mutual empathy, and they’re striving to create an egalitarian 
relationship that really will allow the client to become empowered. 
JOHN: In the upcoming video segment, Amanda is a very bright 
and articulate and Southern young woman who’s struggling with 
some choices she has to make within the context of a complex web of 
relationships. 
RITA: Yeah. That’s right. So let’s watch a little. 
AMANDA: They never say that, but it just seems that way. Because 
like, my parents were married right after high school, and my mom 
has three kids and my dad has three kids, but they’re divorced now. 
And so not the same three. 
RITA: Right. Right. 
AMANDA: But, and my brother lives right next door to my mom, 
with his partner, and they just had a baby. And my sister lives at home 
still, even though she’s in college. But she still lives at home. And my 
other sister’s in high school. And they all—my grandmother even lives 
with my mom, so it’s like, multi-generational right there. Like, my 
grandmother, my mom, my brother, and my sister were all right there. 
And my parents always ask me, and my grandparents too, like, when 
are you coming home and when are you going to start your career? 
And so it kind of seems to me like—I went away for a while, and now 
it’s like, maybe it’s time to come home and start a career and a family. 
And so I just feel like I want those things, and part of me wants them 
right now, but I also, like, really want to pursue this, so. 
RITA: So one of the strategies you use to figure out what it was they 
wanted and to communicate to them that they mattered was sort of to 
take the time to consult with each one, it sounds like. 
AMANDA: Yeah. Yeah, and that was really, really huge for me, 
131
Psychotherapy.net
especially my brother, because he just had a baby. And I just felt like I 
needed to be there for that like, season of his life. And when I talked 
to him and he, like, really understood. And he said like if he were me 
then he would go. But I mean, he’s not at all interested in going to 
another country. 
RITA: Right. 
AMANDA: But knowing me and like hearing me talk about it, he can 
hear that I really should go. But he knows that I, like, really love him 
and want to be there and love his daughter and like, want to be there 
for her. And so me hearing him say that and believing that he really 
means it, that was probably like the most important part. 
RITA: Piece of all of it. Yeah. So I have to ask you one question 
that I think I probably know the answer to. But when you did this 
consultation round, how did to incorporate Amanda? Did you have a 
consultation time with yourself? 
AMANDA:  I don’t know. I mean, I guess I kind of did all along. 
When—I mean, especially like when I talked it through with my 
mom, and the more I talked about it, the more I realized that I really 
believed the things that I was saying. And I got like, more excited 
about, you know, like the things I want to study—like learning about 
trauma reconciliation in Ugan—in Rwanda. I’m not going to Uganda.  
And how that is going to like, apply to things I want to learn later, 
and maybe like continue my studies after the Peace Corps. And I just 
got like, more and more excited about it. And so that was kind of a 
confirmation to me that it’s something I really, really do want to do. 
RITA: How was your mom—were you convincing her, or was 
she coming along with you on that? What was the relationship 
conversation like? 
AMANDA: Yeah. I think I was convincing her. And I remember at the 
end of it she was like, wow, I’ve never heard you say—I’ve never heard 
that before. I didn’t know that this was something that you were so 
interested in. 
And I’m really proud of you,  which was a big—probably the biggest 
part of it. Like, I felt like she really heard me, which hasn’t always 
132
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
happened or doesn’t always happen in our relationship, even though 
I had to like, stop her from interrupting me a few times and like, 
redirect the conversation back to me.  
RITA: Mm-hmm.  
AMANDA: And then to hear just like, get it, and say that she’s proud 
of me and that she’s excited for me instead of, well, I just wish you’d 
come home. 
RITA: Yeah. 
AMANDA: So. 
RITA: Yeah. 
AMANDA: I don’t know if that answers the question, but that’s—
RITA: Yeah, kind of. Because I think when we were talking before, you 
weren’t so sure you would have family support. In fact, I think that 
was one of the biggest burdens in making the decision. 
AMANDA: Mm-hmm. 
RITA: Besides just the sheer—terror may be too strong a word, but 
definitely a fear about missing out on life’s developmental pieces that 
were really valuable to you. That was this other piece with the families 
voices, like, come home, Amanda. It’s time. You’ve had enough fun 
out there. 
AMANDA: Yeah. 
RITA: And then, so when you checked in with them, it wasn’t quite 
that unanimous. 
AMANDA: Right. I mean, of course they want me to be near them, 
and they don’t understand why I would want to leave Georgia ever. 
But they like, really want me to be happy and successful and fulfilled, 
and so they want that more than they want me close to them. And 
so—and I guess I kind of—maybe I like, hopefully knew that. Like I 
hoped that would be the case. But to hear them say that, each of them 
say that, was really good. 
But also I kind of said, you know, if I don’t like it, I can come home.  
And so knowing that it’s not like a permanent forever commitment, 
133
Psychotherapy.net
you know, makes it a little bit easier for everyone, myself included. 
RITA: So you had permission to give it a try from them. And I’m 
hearing indirectly that you sorted it out by talking to them. But I still 
want to come back to that question about how do you check in with 
just Amanda? Is there some way you do that after you’ve had those 
conversations? 
AMANDA: I mean, I do like a little bit of journaling, and a lot of 
praying. And like sometimes I’ll just take a walk, and just like be. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. 
AMANDA: So I guess that is checking in with myself. But I don’t—
like, I would probably go crazy if I like, sat down and thought, OK, 
what do you want to do?  
RITA:  Right. 
AMANDA: I don’t make like, pros and cons lists, really. It’s more like 
I feel like I just like start to feel OK about things. And then I know it’s 
the right or—yeah, the right thing to do. 
RITA: Yeah. So if you were going to name the most positive role model 
in your life right now, who would it be? 
AMANDA: The most positive role model.  That’s like here with—
RITA: It could be anywhere, or a combination of pieces of role 
modeling that you’ve picked up along the way that you really like how 
that person is or you would like to be like them. 
AMANDA: I don’t know.  Maybe like, Nancy,  like my teachers here. 
I think because—well, like, one thing that I really like about Nancy, 
um, is that she is like, super, super smart, but she’s a learner. So like, 
she is really competent in what she knos, but also like, realizes that 
she doesn’t know everything and is like really interested to hear from 
people and to like, to learn—and like to add to her own experience. 
And so that’s something that I really want to be. And sometimes 
maybe I do that too much. Like, I want people to tell me what I should 
know  and what I should believe and what I should do. But—
RITA: You like that value of her willingness to let in other opinions 
134
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
and learn new things, and also she’s really smart and you like that. 
AMANDA: Yeah, and really confident about her own ideas and beliefs, 
which I would like to have more. 
RITA: Yeah. That’s the piece I was thinking might be the role model 
piece, like, OK, here’s this really smart woman who isn’t afraid to take 
in new information. But, she’s also pretty confident about what she 
does know and who she is. 
AMANDA: Yeah. 
RITA: And that’s what I see you moving toward as you sort out the 
different voices in your life and—
AMANDA: Yeah. 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: Rita, in that previous segment, I noticed that you asked 
Amanda if she took time and how she consulted with herself. 
RITA: Yeah. You know, Amanda is caught in the very traditional 
problem that many females find themselves, which is an expectation 
they will check in on everybody else’s opinions and everyone else’s 
needs, and they will do that first, and sometimes foremost. 
JOHN: Right. And so feminist therapy is focusing on how Amanda 
can find her voice and find her place in the world. 
RITA: Yep I have to struggle a little bit with Amanda to bring her back 
to a place where she can look at how she can find her way without 
feeling guilty or burdened by other people’s expectations. 
JOHN: That’s a big challenge. 
RITA: Yes it is. 
JOHN: And so let’s see how it goes. 
RITA: OK. 
AMANDA: Pretend like I’m not really saying goodbye?  is because I’ll 
probably—I mean, I’m sure I’ll see them again. And I’m sure I’ll stay 
in touch. And I don’t like making a big deal out of it, because it makes 
a big deal out of me.  And I don’t really like that. 
135
Psychotherapy.net
RITA: It makes a big deal out of you. 
AMANDA: No, like, I just—I’m obviously really emotional, and so I 
don’t like saying goodbye over and over and over again, and like—
RITA: So denial kind of works for you. 
AMANDA: It’s hard. It’s just hard enough. 
RITA: Yeah. So you’re trying to find ways to make it not quite so 
repeatedly difficult and sad. 
AMANDA: Yeah. I’d rather like take the memories that I have and 
take the meaning that I have from those memories, and say, see you 
later, instead of like, sit down with every person and tell them why 
they’re so important to me and how much I’m going to miss them and 
list the things I’m going to miss. You know? I’d rather just go than do 
that. 
RITA: So can I check on just one little piece of that that I heard? And 
you know, it could be—you know, I don’t even like Freud, but it could 
be a Freudian thing that I heard, where you said it doesn’t make a big 
deal out of me. 
And I know it was just expression, but the reciprocal of that process, 
if you did go sit down with each person that you’re imagining and you 
said, oh, Nancy, thank you so much for everything you’ve meant to 
me. And then it’s pretty predictable that Nancy would say back to you, 
oh, Amanda, you were awesome. Thank you for the ways you took 
the leadership. Thank you for the ways that you were so emotionally 
available in class, and—
AMANDA:  
RITA: Right? 
AMANDA: Mm-hmm. 
RITA: And I’m guessing that it’d be hard saying those things and 
taking the time, but it would even be harder to sit there and hear back 
how much people care about you and your strengths. 
AMANDA: Yeah. Like just yesterday, I say goodbye to the family that 
I’ve been nannying for. And I kind of wanted it to be like a, well, it’s 
136
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
been—it’s been good.  I’ll see ya. And then like, later I would send a 
thank you card or send a card like writing out how much they mean to 
me. 
But the mom, Andrea, like sat down and just told me like how 
important it is to have someone who she really trusts to take care of 
her kids, are like, how big of a deal. And I know that’s a huge deal. 
And, I wanted to, you know, thank her for like, trusting me with the 
most important thing in her life. But, I just like, it was really hard 
to like, sit there. I didn’t want to cry and like, get all involved in the 
moment.  
And it was hard to hear her like tell me that, basically, you know, that 
they love me. And it was just hard to hear that. 
RITA: Yeah. What do you think that’s about? Why is that hard? 
AMANDA: I don’t know. Because I don’t—I feel like I don’t want to 
leave. Like, if I’m such a good thing in their life, I feel like a jerk for 
leaving. So it would just be easier if we could, you know, say goodbye, 
and then maybe I’ll come back.  
RITA: But not to know how you significant you were because 
somehow there’s a message that comes with that that you shouldn’t 
take yourself away because you’re important and helpful to these 
people, and they love you, and that’s such a hard message in our 
culture. And I can’t tell you how many women I know who feel like 
they should clone themselves into at least four, because these people 
at their church tell them how much they matter and they need to be 
over there, and their family needs them, and then they’re really good 
at their work. 
AMANDA: Yeah. 
RITA: And then they’re in a reading group, and the group just wants 
more time with them. And how do you be a wonderful person who 
everyone wants more of and not go around feeling guilty all the time? 
AMANDA: Yeah. I don’t know. I wish I did. Because now that like I’m 
talking about it and you’re pointing it out, I can see like, it was so hard 
for me to leave Kenya and come here—so hard. And when I think of 
why it was so hard, I think of like the high school girls that I spent a 
137
Psychotherapy.net
lot of time with, and they were like, who are we going to talk to now? 
What are we going to do without you? I just love you a lot and I’m 
really grateful for you, but I heard, I’m not going to have any friends.  
I’m not going to have you anymore. 
RITA: Right. 
AMANDA: And then every time I leave like, my family, it’s because 
I feel like my brother needs me, and my little sisters need me. And I 
know my mom needs me. And yeah, I guess that’s one of the reasons 
why it’s so hard. 
RITA: Yeah. 
AMANDA: And why I don’t like for people to tell me how much they 
love me, because it translates to I need you. 
RITA: I need you. 
AMANDA: And I feel bad for not being there. 
RITA: Yeah. So love can feel like a big burden in a weird way. 
AMANDA: Yeah. And then I feel bad for thinking that.  
RITA:  You just can’t get away from it, no matter—yeah. But sorting 
that out is—to me, one of the big jobs of adulthood is—I stumbled 
into this concept when I was working with people with disabilities, 
and it was called interdependence. 
Because I think in our culture we either idolize independence—a 
rough, rugged individual, nobody needs them, they don’t need 
anybody—or dependence, which is child-like. And, you know, there’s 
no model for how to be in the middle and to admit that sometimes 
you need people and sometimes you need to stand on your own 
individual two feet or whatever. 
And I think sometimes the burden of being a lovable, capable person 
is really hard because you have to be the one that decides where the 
energy goes and where the helping goes. 
AMANDA: Mm-hmm. 
RITA: And then people are mad when you take it away, kind of. So 
love can even be expressed in a kind of mean way, like, I really love 
138
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
you, do not leave me. Come back and take care of me. 
AMANDA:  Yeah. 
RITA: So the hard message of someone who loves someone saying that 
is, oh, I am so sorry. I love you, too. And I believe in you. And I think 
you can find some new ways to meet your needs, because I’m going to 
be moving on over here. But I still love you. And I still love that you 
love me. Does that make sense? 
AMANDA: Yeah. It totally does. 
RITA: It felt like that was a little sermon, there, but. 
AMANDA: No, it totally does. 
And that I’m realizing that I thought that I was carrying this burden 
of being so needed, and now I’m like, oh, it’s kind of arrogant to think 
that I’m so—that people like, need me so badly. 
RITA: Yeah. I had a little bit that same feeling when I was in India, 
like, oh, what—you know? But it was also this is freeing thing, like, 
oh, OK. It’s a little embarrassing, like you said. But it’s also kind of 
freeing. Like,t hen the job becomes to figure out who you are. Do what 
you need to do with your life. 
AMANDA: Mm-hmm. 
RITA: Does that feel like a burden or a happy thing or—
AMANDA: A good thing. 
RITA: Yeah? 
AMANDA: Freedom is always a good thing. 
RITA: Mmm, you don’t sound really convinced. 
AMANDA:  Well, because I’m thinking that sometimes it’s hard, 
because then you have to like, really look at yourself and figure out 
who you are and what you want to be, or who you want to be. 
RITA: I know. I know. 
AMANDA: But—but, yeah. It’s a good thing. 
RITA:  Well, that’s something we can talk about in our next session 
139
Psychotherapy.net
too, if you want. 
AMANDA:  
RITA: It may have to be after Rwanda. 
AMANDA: Yeah. It will. 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: What we just saw is pretty profound. 
RITA: Yeah. 
JOHN: The whole sense that love can be a burden is a big deal. And it’s 
also interesting that it’s that balance of communion versus agency. 
RITA: It is. It’s a very tough balance to find. And also I think there, 
at the end, Amanda was facing, in a very endearing sort of way, how 
hard it is to experience freedom. Freedom we think of as very positive, 
but it’s a burden in itself that we have to decide who we are, how we’re 
going to be, how to use our own potential in the world. 
JOHN: Yeah. Amanda is a very bright young woman, and I think she’s 
insightful, and she has a lot of the qualities that make her an excellent 
candidate for feminist therapy. 
This next session is an example of the solution-focused approach. And 
the featured therapist or counselor in this case is a colleague of ours, 
Chi Pham, who is a school counselor in a high school setting. 
RITA: I think solution-focused is often a very great theory for school 
counselors to use. It’s because solution-focused therapists believe that 
people are constructing their own reality. 
JOHN: Exactly, and one of the points I think that solution-focused 
counselors make is that, well, since people are constructing their own 
reality, why don’t we just focus it and move it toward the positive and 
towards strengths and toward solutions, which, I think, is one of the 
reasons why solution-focused therapists often come across as sort of 
persistently, and maybe even relentlessly, positive. 
RITA: Right. Right. Yeah. They are using all sorts of different 
techniques, but it’s always to focus on the positive, on the strengths, 
and on the choices that people can make that direction. 
140
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
JOHN: In this case, Chi is using some of those techniques with Tesla, 
who’s an 18-year-old senior in high school. 
RITA: And she’s struggling with the perennial problem of choosing 
college. So let’s watch a little. 
CHI PHAM: So I just want to hear from you first. So after our session, 
what would—how would we know that we had a good session? 
TESLA: If I could—I’d like to if not have my decision made, but I’d 
like to have a clear idea of how I can make my decision. That would be 
ideal. 
CHI PHAM: And so what kind of decision are we talking about here. 
TESLA: I need to decide between two schools for next year, going to 
college. 
CHI PHAM: All right. So you mentioned feeling guilty about making 
a choice to go to Richmond, which is really expensive, and you’re 
wondering if it’s worth the money. So let’s say on a scale of one to 10, 
and one being like, no guilt at all. You feel really comfortable. And 
then 10 being like, gut-wrenching guilt. You just, it’s paralyzing. You 
can’t imagine doing it. About where would you say on that scale are 
you at right now? 
TESLA: So, like a seven and a half. 
CHI PHAM: Seven and a half. And tell me about that guilt feeling. 
TESLA: Well, I just feel like I’m closing doors for other people, and I 
feel like I’m being really super, super selfish. And I know it’s for, like, 
a better future for me, but I don’t want to like affect anyone else in my 
decision. And I’m going to, and I don’t like that feeling at all. I hate 
feeling like I’m causing problems or like there’s even a wake in what 
my decision is. 
CHI PHAM: OK. So how could we move that just down a little bit to, 
let’s say, a six. How could we reduce some of that guilt feeling? 
TESLA: Well, I’d like to work something out with my parents. 
CHI PHAM: OK. Tell me some more about that. 
TESLA: If I could—well, I’d like to take the weight off their shoulders. 
141
Psychotherapy.net
And if I could get scholarships or student loans. But then that closes 
doors possibly in my future. And I’d like to be able to pay for some of 
college—a lot of it. 
CHI PHAM: OK. So what are some possibilities? You said you can pay 
for some of college, you could get some more scholarships. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: How could you do that? 
TESLA: Well, I don’t know if I can get scholarships this year, because 
it’s pretty late in the year. But next year, when I’m a sophomore, I can 
hopefully apply for work-based scholarships. And I plan on doing that, 
because I don’t want to be a burden for my parents at all. And I’d like 
to apply for student loans under my name, and not my parents’. 
CHI PHAM: OK. 
TESLA: So I’d like to—and that would make me feel better. 
CHI PHAM: So you’ve got a couple ideas. You’re going to apply for 
some more scholarships when you’re there, because there’s usually 
department scholarships, and you’ll learn about other opportunities 
while you’re on campus. Because it sounds like you’re not getting very 
much financial aid this first year. 
TESLA: Nuh uh. 
CHI PHAM: And I heard about your sister, who’s going to school in 
a couple of years, so maybe by then—you know, when you have two 
kids in college, that increases your needs, so that might qualify you for 
some more loans and scholarships. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: OK. So let’s take that even further. How could we get it 
down to a five or maybe a four? How can we really relieve that guilt 
feeling so where you feel really good about your decision? 
TESLA: Well, I’d probably need to get a job and help pay for some of 
it. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. 
TESLA: And if I could do that, it would be really helpful. But I’m 
142
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
worried because my parents don’t want me to get a job, because 
they’ve always said that schooling is my job and doing well in school is 
my job. So I feel like I’m battling against that on two fronts. Because I 
want to take the weight off their shoulders, but then at the same time, 
they’re like, barring me from doing that. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. 
TESLA: So if I could get a job and save up a little bit, like even if I 
could just pay for my books, I would feel so much better, because it’s 
just that little extra expense taken away. 
CHI PHAM: OK. And so finding a job—maybe work study or 
summer work. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: But then you’re still nervous about the school work, 
because you’re supposed to be there as a student. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: And so that’s causing also you a little bit of anxiety. 
TESLA: Yeah. I’m nervous for the workload in school, because I just 
don’t know if I can handle it with my learning disability. And I don’t 
know what options I have there for help. 
CHI PHAM: OK. And tell me a little bit more about your learning 
disability. 
TESLA: Well, in high school it’s been easy, because I’m offered so 
much accommodations and teachers are really forgiving. But I don’t 
know if that’ll be the same in school. And I don’t want to get there 
and not be able to handle the work because it’s above my level of 
comprehension. And that’s a very real possibility, and if I flunk a class, 
my parents would not be paying for college anymore at all. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. OK. And so you managed to get through 
high school, or you did a great job of getting through high school 
with some help. And it sounds like you’re nervous about the workload 
coming up for college, which is now kind of tied in with feelings of 
guilt that you—I’m not sure that this is a good choice, because it’s a 
competitive school, and that’s tied in with some anxiety about your 
143
Psychotherapy.net
ability to do the work. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: But what have you done in the past when you’ve had 
those feelings, because I’m sure those have come up before? 
TESLA: Yeah. I mean like coming in to high school, I didn’t think 
I could handle what was going on at all. And I didn’t, sometimes. 
Sometimes I was really not a good student. But then I had to like, kick 
it double into gear to get back. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah. Tell me about those times when you felt like you 
were a really good student. Like, yes. I’m doing it really well. 
TESLA: Well, it helped that I liked my classes. 
CHI PHAM: OK. 
TESLA: Like, this year, for example, AP Gov is the hardest class I have 
ever taken, but I love it. It’s so interesting. And then I do the work 
because I want to do it, because I like it. But then when there’s classes 
that I don’t like, like all of my math class that they’re hard for me 
because the dyslexia makes it really hard to do the math. And I just 
don’t find it interesting, so I don’t do well in them. 
CHI PHAM: Right. So picking classes that you really like and you feel 
excited about. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: So and one of the great things about college is that you 
have lots of choices. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: Right? And there’s all kinds of opportunities that you 
have never seen before, right? 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: Anthropology classes and gender studies. 
TESLA: History of Rock and Roll. 
CHI PHAM: The History of Rock and Roll. Right. Classes that we 
don’t offer here in high school. And so that sounds like that might 
144
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
alleviate some of your anxieties—finding a place or finding classes 
that you really, really enjoy. 
TESLA: Yeah. And then I can do well in them. And I think that 
would help me like, feel like I was getting my money’s worth if I was 
proving—like, doing well in these classes, and then therefore proving 
that this is where I should be. But I don’t even know if I can do that. 
JOHN: Rita, I found myself really liking Chi’s use of the scaling 
question, which is a traditional solution-focused assessment 
technique. But he’s using it not only for assessment, but also for 
intervention purposes to help her shrink that guilt and anxiety a little 
bit. 
RITA: Right. It was good. It was a good intervention. Because 
sometimes Tesla, her anxiety would come out, and she’d start kind of 
focusing on what the problems were again. And he’d bring it back. 
JOHN: And that’s not unusual, and that’s really his job to keep the 
momentum focused on the positive, help refocus her when she drifts 
off into some negative thinking. 
RITA: Mm-hmm. And, of course, he knows her and knows some of 
the strengths that he can draw on and point her toward some of her 
past successes. 
JOHN: Right, which is what he’s going to do in this next segment, 
where he draws her even further into concrete positive things that she 
can apply in her life situation in the future. 
RITA: So let’s look at that. 
CHI PHAM: And again, tell me some times where you felt like a good 
student, So something that you enjoyed. And what about doing the 
homework part, or where you got excited about doing the homework 
or doing a project. What were some other times where you had those 
kind of feelings? 
TESLA: It helped when I had good teachers who understood where I 
was coming from and why sometimes things were more difficult for 
me. And I never—I tried not to like, have anything handed to me, 
because that’s not fair. Just because I’m dyslexic doesn’t mean I deserve 
145
Psychotherapy.net
tons of special treatment. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. 
TESLA: But it helps when I had teachers who could help me help 
myself. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah. So part of having a good class is also having a good 
teacher. And again, what a great opportunity in college, because the 
professors are available with office hours. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: And you can meet them before signing up for their class. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: And so it seems like there’s a way to find out who your 
good teachers are, or that you connect with initially. 
TESLA: And I know there’s good opportunity to, like, connect with 
program for people with learning disabilities at Richmond. So I 
hopefully won’t have to take many math classes. 
CHI PHAM: OK. So we’ve identified a couple things that you can do 
that make you feel good as a student. And does that help with—you 
know, again, on the scale from 1 to 10, where are we at now with some 
of these ideas? 
TESLA: Well, if I’m able to do well and feel like I’m working hard 
enough where I deserve to have my parents pay for it, then I guess it’s 
like a 4.5. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah? We’ve reduced it a little bit? 
TESLA: Yeah.  
CHI PHAM: That’s great. So you feel a little bit calmer. 
TESLA: Yes. 
CHI PHAM: And let’s go a little further. 
TESLA: OK. 
CHI PHAM: How would we get it down—could we get it down to two 
or three? 
146
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
TESLA: I hope so.  I think if—
CHI PHAM: Of the things that you said in high school that was 
helpful is that you felt like you got a lot of support and some help. And 
I’m just guessing here, and you tell me. Is there some worry or some 
feelings about not being able to find or create a support system? 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. 
CHI PHAM: You’re going to be halfway across the country. 
TESLA: And—
CHI PHAM: On your own. New people who don’t know you. 
TESLA: And new systems that won’t—I don’t know if it will help 
benefit me. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. 
TESLA: Oh, that scares me so much.  I’m so nervous. In both schools. 
Like, it’s the East Coast. They’re different than what I’m used to here, 
and I don’t know if—I don’t know. I feel like I’m going to a different 
country sometimes.  
CHI PHAM: Yeah. Would it be accurate all to say kind of like when 
you walk on stage and there’s, um, there’s a new audience who you 
don’t know and you’ve got to kind of convince them that this is a good 
show? 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: Is it at all like that? 
TESLA: Like doing play teasers when all the school kids come and 
watch, and they just, you have to like convince them in the first 30 
seconds that they’re going to like the show, or—
CHI PHAM: Yeah. 
TESLA: And you can lose your audience, and that’s a bad feeling. 
CHI PHAM: Right. And so you’ve kind of been in that situation 
before. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
147
Psychotherapy.net
CHI PHAM: How did you handle it then? 
TESLA: Knowing what was going on and taking control of the 
situation. 
CHI PHAM: OK. 
TESLA: And helping on—well, when you’re on stage, you have to help 
the other actors around you and support them while doing your job 
acting. 
CHI PHAM: OK. So you said that you can kind of take control of the 
situation a little bit, and you said you kind of help the other actors, as 
well. How could you kind of control the situation when you walk into 
this new environment called college? 
TESLA: I think they need to ask for help, and not—like, while I want 
to be able to do this on my own, I don’t know if I’m—I don’t have all 
the information yet, and I need to swallow my pride and admit that 
I’m going to need a lot of help, and frequently, and make friends with 
career counselors, and—
CHI PHAM: Yeah. And who are the people that can help? 
TESLA: Well, I know that there’s career counseling and there’s 
tutoring that you can get into, and hopefully I’ll make friends.  And 
the admissions counselors. I like my admissions counselor a lot. She’s 
really nice. So I need to find friends—not necessarily friends, but 
people who can help me, and find those fast, and be goal one when I 
get there. 
CHI PHAM: There are people knocking on your door and they just 
want to do all kinds of things with you, and that you’ve got all kinds of 
friends, and you’re really popular. 
TESLA:  I could deal with that. That’d be OK with me. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah. How does that—yeah. How does that help with 
kind of this anxiety about making friends? 
TESLA: Well, that—that would be so much easier. I would feel 
so much better if I like had a built-in system of people I can like 
automatically study with. 
148
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
CHI PHAM: Yeah, so I hear—so there is a fair amount of anxiety 
around this. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: Where you’re nervous about kind of being by yourself, 
and you’re having to create kind of the environment or the situation 
that you have here that’s helped you so much over the years. 
TESLA: Mm-hmm. And I’m just nervous that coming from different 
parts of the country, like, at least in the culture I’ve grown up with, it’s 
so open and friendly. And I’m nervous I’m going to go to a place where 
they’re a little more cold and a little more reserved, and not so willing 
to be open to friendships. And I just don’t how to act around people 
who are more reserved. 
CHI PHAM: And so you’re a little nervous about kind of going to the 
East Coast, where it might feel a little bit different than where you’re 
comfortable with. 
TESLA: Yeah. And I don’t want to go out there and be like a—I’m 
nervous to scare people off by coming into school and being like, 
this is me. I’m Tesla, I’m from Montana, and blah. And like, be 
overbearing to people. That’s what I’m afraid that I’ll do. 
CHI PHAM: But could you also see that as a really positive thing? 
Where you are so different, and coming from the Wild West, that 
people would be really open to that and it would be kind of refreshing 
because you’re different than kind of what you perceive as the East 
Coast? 
TESLA: I never thought about that. I’d like that if that was how it 
was, and—because that would help with like being—I don’t want to 
like, initiate the friendships. I want to have them more open and free-
flowing. And if like people are interested in me, that would make me 
feel better. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah. Because I hear you saying it a little bit as if it’s not a 
strength, that it’s kind of a negative to be from Montana. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: But what if it were a positive, and that part of the reason 
149
Psychotherapy.net
you were there, at school, was to show people another way of being, 
another part of the country, to share your experiences. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: And that that is part of other people’s education, too, 
which is why colleges want geographic diversity. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: Is that it brings in interesting ideas and different 
personalities. And—
TESLA: And it gives me a conversation starter. 
CHI PHAM: A conversation starter. Yeah. So what would it be like, 
then, to go into the conversations or into these interactions thinking, 
huh, I have something to offer these people. 
TESLA:  Well, I’d first have to become cocky, and I’m not cocky. 
So. But if I was, I could make some jokes about how we don’t use 
outhouses in Montana. And then I could be—I can make people 
laugh, and I’d like to be able to do that. And I feel like that would help 
me a lot by attracting friends if I can get them laughing first without 
making a fool of myself, because that’s when people get annoyed with 
you, if you’re too boisterous. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. And so I hear you’re saying that you’re 
nervous about meeting people, but you’re outgoing. Right? You said 
that you like to make people laugh. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: And you have lots of these different interests. Tell me 
some more about the things that you like about yourself. 
TESLA: Oh, that’s hard. 
CHI PHAM: That are interesting. That kind of make up who you are. 
TESLA: Well, I’m really, really good about caring about people. I have 
a lot of love that I can spew at people. I have really intense motherly 
instincts. And, I mean, I like that about myself, I guess—being able to 
like, care for people. And I’m a good listener,  I guess. 
CHI PHAM: Yeah? And tell me about what it looks like when you care 
150
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
for the people. 
TESLA: It’s not a about listening—or about me, it’s about like, what I 
need to do for the other person, and that’s the most important thing 
sometimes, is being able to care for other people, even when you’re not 
feeling so great yourself. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. 
TESLA: But I feel like that’s a deeper part of relationships, and I don’t 
know how to show that to people when I first meet them. 
CHI PHAM: Mm-hmm. Yeah, that takes some time to establish some 
trust, and—but what I hear you saying too is that it’s easier for you to 
take care of other people, and not necessarily take care of yourself or 
do what feels good for you, because that feels guilty and selfish. 
TESLA: Yeah. 
CHI PHAM: So we’re kind of coming around to kind of what brought 
you here—feeling this guilt that, this is what I want to do, but I don’t 
feel so good about that. 
TESLA: Yeah. They’re all connected a little bit, and,  well, I don’t 
know. I just don’t want to be selfish in any of it, because I really just 
despise selfishness in people. 
RITA: I really liked when she used the successes that he was aware of. 
Tesla’s been in an acting situation. She’s done shows and plays. And he 
was able to point her toward those and have her make the transition to 
what she was facing the future. 
JOHN: Right. Right. Exactly. And I think what that does is it really 
helps her develop a concrete plan. He kind of was able to draw the 
concrete methods of coping out, like who to ask for help and when to 
ask for help. 
RITA: Right. Right. Yeah. It was great. So I really think Tesla’s a great 
candidate for solution-focused, and I think it does work really well in 
the school setting. 
This next session is an example of family counseling using a family 
systems approach. Our colleague, Dr. Kirsten Murray, is the counselor, 
and she obviously loved doing counseling with families. And she’s also 
151
Psychotherapy.net
a published author in this area. 
JOHN: One thing about family systems work is it’s similar to feminist 
theory in that it places the origin or the roots of the problem outside 
of the individual. In this case, generally systems—mostly the family 
system. And so the focus for the family therapist is on, if we can 
change some of the interactions of the dynamics in the system, we can 
then address the symptoms that are manifested in specific individuals 
in the family. 
RITA: Right. Right. Which makes total sense. In the upcoming video, 
Kirsten is able to use a number of strategies, but she uses the family 
structure and some family sculpting to facilitate some very genuine 
emotional communication in the family. 
JOHN: And let’s see how that works. 
MURRAY: Beth, can you tell me a little bit about what it’s like to 
watch Brayden and Tanner bicker, or what you see? 
BETH: Yeah. I guess I know that it happens. I mean, I argued with 
my brother, and we did things to annoying one another. And I 
think similar with Jake’s family. So we know that it’s part of having 
a sibling. But it just seems—I guess in my mind, I just would like 
them to appreciate one another and enjoying being together at least 
sometimes. 
MURRAY: Yeah. 
BETH: And it just seems like they are always looking for something to 
say negative about each other. 
MURRAY: OK. So for you, as you talk, I think you just want a little bit 
of peace. 
BETH: Right. Right. Just let’s get along for a little bit during the day. 
MURRAY: OK. All right. 
BETH: Right. 
MURRAY: OK. So Brayden—sneaky Brayden. Now, was like, a small 
example of what you guys do to each other, just now? Yeah? All right. 
So I wonder—Brayden, what did you hear your mom say? 
152
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
TANNER: What?  
BRAYDEN: We’re looking for something negative to say to each other. 
RITA: Yeah. Do you agree with her, that you think a lot about negative 
things to say with Tanner? 
BRAYDEN: Yeah. Because there’s not very many positives. 
MURRAY: Aww. You even found a negative thing to say just now. 
TANNER: I don’t [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. 
MURRAY: And you have a really big smile when you say it, too, like 
you’re kind of proud of being so sneaky. OK. Tanner, you’re loaded 
and ready to go, no? 
TANNER: He doesn’t have anything positive about—
BRAYDEN: Woo. 
JAKE: Guys, it’s not a Competition to see who can—
TANNER: But it is, Dad. 
JAKE: —say the most negative—
TANNER: But it is. 
JAKE: Well, that’s probably what we need to work on. 
MURRAY: Yeah. So, Jake, right now, I mean, when you’re watching 
them say negative things back and forth to each other, what’s it like for 
you? 
JAKE: Well, they’re just kind of joking right now, but they do. They 
are very critical of each other. So they’re always looking for things 
to point out that the other is doing wrong, which, in some cases, 
is OK, because I kind of have them monitor each other in certain 
circumstances to make sure they’re safe and doing the right thing. 
MURRAY: Mm-hmm. 
JAKE: But they kind of take it an extreme, and things that really don’t 
matter, they’re just looking for opportunities to pick at each other. 
MURRAY: OK. 
When you get annoyed, where do you feel that in your body? That 
153
Psychotherapy.net
might be kind of a strange question at first. 
JAKE: Yeah. 
MURRAY: So like when I get annoying, I can feel tenseness in my 
shoulders. Like, my shoulders start to feel like they’re connected to my 
ears, or my stomach tightens up, or I might make more fists with my 
hands. 
JAKE: Yeah. Probably the shoulders. 
MURRAY: Your shoulders, yeah. Tanner, when you get annoyed, 
where do you feel it in your body? In you head? 
BRAYDEN: I feel it in my face, because he slaps me. 
TANNER:  I hi-five your face. 
BRAYDEN: No, you slap me. 
TANNER: You can go, hi-five. 
BRAYDEN: You slap me and then—
TANNER: Like, you move your hand so he goes—
BRAYDEN: Hey. 
MURRAY: So Brayden, you feel annoyed sometimes too? Yeah? Are 
you feeling especially annoyed right now, Tanner, because you just lost 
your pen? 
TANNER: Yup. 
MURRAY: Yeah. 
TANNER: And I want my special pink one, too. 
MURRAY: Ah. You liked it a lot. 
TANNER: But at least I got my faces. 
MURRAY: I wonder if there is a little piece of this that you guys might 
actually like being around each other, even if annoying each other is 
kind of fun sometimes. 
TANNER: It is.  
MURRAY: It is? OK. All right. 
154
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
TANNER: It can be. 
MURRAY: It can be. Brayden—
TANNER: And I’m pretty sure it’s the same for him. 
MURRAY: Do you think Tanner’s right? Is it the same for you? 
BRAYDEN: It’s probably fun for him. 
MURRAY: OK. 
TANNER: You annoy me, too. 
MURRAY: I’m going to stop you for just a second,Tanner. 
BRAYDEN: Well you tackle me when I’m brushing my teeth every 
night. 
MURRAY: Brayden, the more that you talk and that you say that it’s 
fun for him, I wonder if there’s part of you, sometimes, that feels a 
little hurt by the way that Tanner picks on you. 
BRAYDEN: Mmm, sort of. 
MURRAY: Sort of? Can you tell a little bit about that? 
BRAYDEN: I don’t know. I don’t really know much about it. 
MURRAY: Much about it. Sometimes do you never feel sad after he 
teases you or hi-fives your face? 
BRAYDEN: Sometimes. 
MURRAY: Sometimes. That must feel pretty lonely sometimes. Yeah. 
I wonder, would you guys be willing to try something with me? It’s a 
little different. It’s called a family sculpt. OK? So you know how you 
can sculpt things out of clay? OK? This game is how you can sculpt 
something out of a family. You ready to try it with me? 
TANNER: So we’re pretty much clay. 
MURRAY: It’s like you’re clay, right? And you can sculpt the way you 
feel or how you think it is in your family. And I’m wondering if you’d 
let me try and sculpt you first. Would that be OK? 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: All right? And Brayden, I’m going to ask you, especially, 
155
Psychotherapy.net
because I was wondering if I could sculpt an example of sometimes 
when you feel alone or hurt after Tanner picked on you. 
BRAYDEN: Hmm. 
TANNER: You show that he gets me back. When I’m walking away, he 
always jumps ahh! 
MURRAY: You know what, Tanner? 
TANNER: He’s a monkey. 
MURRAY: We’ll give you a chance to sculpt your family, too. OK? But 
Brayden, you want to go first? 
BRAYDEN: I don’t really know how. 
MURRAY: I will help you. 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: Is that a deal? Do you trust me to help you? 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: OK. All right. So we are going to give that a try. OK? So, 
first, let’s stand up. Loosen up. This is for everybody. 
BETH: Oh, all of us—
MURRAY: Come on, guys. 
BRAYDEN: [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. Wee. 
MURRAY: OK. And we’re going to try and stay right in this area for 
the sculpt. 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: OK? And you and me, we’re going to work together. 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: OK? So the first thing that we’re going to do is—I’m going 
to get down here so I can talk to you like this. So you were talking to 
me before about sometimes when Tanner picks on you, that it can hurt 
sometimes. 
BRAYDEN: Yeah. 
156
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
MURRAY: Yeah. 
BRAYDEN: Because he punches me. 
MURRAY: So it can hurt like, outside, like on your body. 
BRAYDEN: Yes. 
MURRAY: Do you ever also feel sad sometimes inside? 
BRAYDEN: Yeah. 
MURRAY: OK. All right. So when I was first talking to you, 
sometimes that can feel like you’re pretty alone. And if I were thinking 
of a way that alone might look if I sculpt it, I might just kind of like, sit 
on the ground like this by myself. Does that feel right to you? Is that 
one way alone looks? 
BRAYDEN: Yeah. 
MURRAY: Is there another way that you had in mind? 
BRAYDEN: Not really. 
MURRAY: Not really? OK. Do you want to come down here and sit on 
the floor with me like this? 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: Aww, thank you. Very good work. All right. So , my next 
question for you is, when you’re feeling alone and your feelings are 
kind of hurt, what does Tanner do? 
BRAYDEN: He comes over and punches me more. 
MURRAY: OK, so sometimes—
TANNER: What? No. 
MURRAY: Hold on. 
BRAYDEN: Only Dad pulls me, and starts pulling my ears. 
MURRAY: We’re just doing this from—OK. 
BRAYDEN: And my hair. 
MURRAY: So we’re going to do this from the way that Brayden sees 
it, and then we’ll do a way that Tanner sees it, OK? So nobody gets 
157
Psychotherapy.net
to argue with you, all right? This is how you see it. OK? All right. 
So Tanner, one thing I’m going to have you do is come tower over 
Brayden, like you’re going to pick on him, but you can’t touch him. 
OK? And it’s tempting to be silly. Can I help you? Stay and face that 
way, like your mom. 
BETH: He’s not going to touch you, Brayden. 
KRISTEN MURRAY: He won’t. All right. Can I touch you? 
TANNER: Yeah. 
MURRAY: All right. So sometimes when I think about—like, do you 
ever feel angry when you’re picking on Brayden? Like you’re really 
annoyed? 
TANNER: Yeah. 
MURRAY: So when you’re angry, how’s that look in your body? 
TANNER: [LAUGHTER] 
MURRAY: For me, sometimes it looks like this. 
TANNER:  
MURRAY: I do this. I put my hand. But this is a very—this is like a 
mom kind of angry, right? 
BRAYDEN: Or an old grandma. 
MURRAY: Or a grandma kind of angry, like this. You’re absolutely 
right. So when—
TANNER: That’s the ear-pulling thing. 
MURRAY: Yeah, right? 
TANNER: We made it up, called the granny and the hair. That’s called 
the grandpa. 
MURRAY: This is the grandpa? 
TANNER: Yeah. 
MURRAY: OK. I’ll remember that. That’s a pretty good move. 
TANNER: And then this is the angry grandpa. 
158
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
BRAYDEN: And then this is the grandma who doesn’t know what—
MURRAY: So what—what’s angry look like for you? OK, but you can’t 
touch him, but you can stand over him like this. You stay feeling kind 
of lonely right here. OK? And I just want you to try and freeze, all 
right? 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: OK. You’re doing a really good job. OK. So, remember, 
you’re feeling angry. OK. Now, Brayden, I another question for you. 
When this is happening, what does Mom do? 
BRAYDEN: Study. 
MURRAY: And what’s Mom doing? Mom’s studying. So I’m going to 
put Mom over here in a chair, like she’s studying. OK? All right. So 
Beth, I’m going to put you with your back here. 
BETH: OK. 
MURRAY: And sit like you’re studying and paying really close 
attention to all that homework. 
BETH: OK. 
MURRAY: OK. And then what does Dad do? 
TANNER: He’s usually—
MURRAY: Hold on. 
BRAYDEN: Working on the computer. 
MURRAY: Dad’s working on the computer? OK. All right. So Dad, 
I’m going to put you over here, and sitting right here working on your 
computer. 
TANNER: He also likes a shower sometimes. 
MURRAY: I would hope so. 
JAKE: Every day. 
TANNER: No, once a week. 
MURRAY: So even though this can feel a little silly right now—
TANNER: It does. 
159
Psychotherapy.net
MURRAY: —the next thing I’m going to ask you guys to do is just 
feel how you’re feeling. OK? So if you’re supposed to be feeling lonely, 
let yourself feel lonely. If you’re feeling angry, let yourself feel angry. 
I know it’s kind of silly. Imagine that he just did something that’s so 
annoying, OK? And you’re standing right over the top of him. And I’m 
just going to have you hold in your positions for a minute. 
So Brayden, when you look around and see how your family is right 
now, is this kind of what it’s like sometimes when you’re being picked 
on? Yeah? 
BRAYDEN: Most of the time. 
MURRAY: Most of the time. What’s most right about how we sculpted 
your family? 
What’s it like for you to see your mom and dad turned away like that? 
BRAYDEN: Sort of normal. 
MURRAY: Sort of normal. OK. Do you feel a little more lonely? 
BRAYDEN: Mmm, sort of. 
MURRAY: Sort of? OK. All right. Well, what’s it like for you right now 
to sit like this? 
BETH: Uncomfortable. 
MURRAY: Yeah. Can you tell me what’s most uncomfortable about it? 
BETH: I think just—well, just as far as being here or hearing? 
MURRAY: Both. Both. 
BETH: All of it, I think, is you just hate to hear him say that that 
makes him more lonely. And, of course, I’m knowing that I have been 
super busy, and, you know, there’s been a lot to do. And I know that, 
and I’ve already kind of had that guilt, anyway. So that’s definitely 
uncomfortable. 
MURRAY: Yeah. This makes the guilt a lot more real. 
BETH: Right. 
MURRAY: Yeah. 
160
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
BETH: Yeah. 
MURRAY: Yeah. 
JOHN: From what we’ve already seen, Kirsten has used modeling and 
joining and some family sculpting to elicit lots of different responses 
from the family. She also sets some limits at various points. 
RITA: Yeah, she did. And you know what was interesting for me—to 
see how much emotion came up for the family members when she was 
doing the sculpt. 
JOHN: You know, that is amazing—just by moving people, having 
them move each other around a room and having them talk produces 
these strong emotional reactions. 
RITA: Yeah. And in the next one, we see her do some more sculpting, 
moving people around, and letting other people have some control so 
that everybody kind of gets a chance to have that experience. 
JOHN: Right. 
RITA: Let’s watch. 
MURRAY: OK. Well who would you feel the safest talking to about it 
now? 
BRAYDEN: Maybe Mom. 
MURRAY: Maybe Mom? All right. So it sounds like you would want 
to be close with Mom. How can we sculpt you to show that you’re 
close with Mom?  You’re going to wave at her? 
Mom, do you have any ideas of how you would want to show Brayden 
that you’re close with him? 
BETH: what if I turn my chair and you come sit with me. 
BRAYDEN: OK. 
MURRAY: What’s this—how’s this feel? 
BRAYDEN: Good. 
MURRAY: Good. 
BETH: Feels really good to me. 
161
Psychotherapy.net
MURRAY: Yeah. Can you say more? Because it seems like you were 
kind of craving wanting to do that. 
BETH: Yeah. Yeah, just—sorry. I can’t say much. 
MURRAY: It’s OK. You just be with him. 
BRAYDEN: What? Oh. 
MURRAY: It’s really touching you right now. 
BETH: Yeah. Because, you know, to hear him say that he’s lonely or 
sad and feels like I’m not there. So. 
MURRAY: You have a big smile on your face. 
BRAYDEN: Mm-hmm. 
BETH: It’s good to have him right here. 
MURRAY: What would your smile say if it could talk? 
BRAYDEN: This feels really good. 
MURRAY: Really good. Yeah? And what—we’ve got to figure out what 
the heck we’re going to do with these two, right? 
How would we put them? 
JAKE: Would it be be far away from you or close to you, if he cared 
about you, Brayden? 
BRAYDEN: It’d be closer. 
MURRAY: Closer? Can we put him right next to you, right here? 
BRAYDEN: Sure. 
MURRAY: OK. So Tanner, why don’t we stand you here. All right. 
And would he be touching you if he was feeling close with you, in a 
nice way? No. 
JAKE: In a nice way, Tanner. 
MURRAY: No face hi-fives. 
BRAYDEN: No. 
MURRAY: No face, hi-fives. How would that be for for you? Does 
that feel right for you? Tanner, what’s that like to touch him on the 
162
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
shoulder like that? 
TANNER: I’m kind of afraid he’s going to hit me, but. 
MURRAY: It doesn’t look like it. 
TANNER: But I feel like this arm is gonna go [SOUND EFFECT]. 
MURRAY: So you’re a little on the protective, but you’re willing to 
trust him right now. You’re willing to trust him. So he’s trusting you 
that you’re going to take care of him. And it kind of looks like you 
want to take care of him, too. Yeah. You have a really big smile on your 
face. 
BETH: Yeah. This is much more comfortable. 
MURRAY: Is this some of the piece that you—
BETH: Yeah. And it’s just nice to get a little glimpse of maybe some of 
what they really feel, but don’t necessarily expression. 
MURRAY: Talk about. 
BETH: So. Yeah. 
BETH: I think that’s nice. 
MURRAY: All right, Tanner. So how—when you think about how you 
want it to be in your family. First of all, where are you? Where would 
you like to be in our sculpt? 
TANNER: Hmm. In the middle. 
MURRAY: In the middle. OK. So why don’t you stand right here, and 
this can be our middle. All right. Now when you think about how you 
want your family to be, who do you want to add in next? Both your 
parents at the same time. 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: OK. Can you tell them where you would want them? Here, 
here, here, here. 
BETH: Right here? 
MURRAY: Those were some pretty descript words, Tanner. 
BETH: This side. 
163
Psychotherapy.net
MURRAY: OK. So with arms. Oh. Do you want to be able to—do you 
want to stand on a chair so you can reach them? 
TANNER: Sure. 
MURRAY: OK. 
TANNER: Awesome chair. 
JAKE: Can he, have like a crown, too? 
MURRAY:  You know, if I had props, I’d bring them. 
TANNER: I’m a king. 
MURRAY: What’s it like to be a little taller? Yeah? Yeah? You want it 
to be like you’re—
JAKE: Both feet on that chair so you don’t fall. 
MURRAY: All right. Now, we’ve got one more to add in. Where 
should we put Brayden? 
JAKE: Tanner. 
MURRAY: Behind you? OK. 
BETH: All right. Standing on the floor behind you. Oh, in the chair. 
TANNER: That way he’s kind of—not quite taller than me, but he’s 
still here. 
MURRAY: He’s still there. 
BRAYDEN: So I’m taller. I’m almost as tall as Dad. 
KRISTEN MURRAY: Tanner. What’s important to you about being 
tall? 
TANNER: Well, I can see more of what’s going on in the house. 
MURRAY: Oh, OK. OK, but we’ve got to—
JAKE: Brayden, settle down. 
BETH: We’ve got to be down here. 
MURRAY: How’d Tanner put us? He was really good staying how you 
put him. 
BRAYDEN: Sorry. 
164
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
MURRAY: It’s OK. So you like being able to know everything that’s 
going on. 
TANNER: But more. 
MURRAY: More. OK. 
BRAYDEN: How do you know—
MURRAY: Pretty wise. 
BRAYDEN: —more than what’s going on? 
MURRAY: So you want to know more about what’s going on. What 
else do you like about being up there, with your arms around your 
family? 
TANNER: Well, it makes me feel closer to my family—
MURRAY: Yeah? 
TANNER: —-than it sometimes is. 
MURRAY: Yeah. So sometimes did you feel alone the way that 
Brayden said he felt alone? 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: It’s just good to be reminded that you’re surrounded by 
people that love you. 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: Yeah. I like that feeling. It’s like getting a big hug. 
TANNER: Yeah. 
MURRAY: All right. Why don’t we unsculpt and sit down? 
TANNER: OK. 
BETH: OK, I think this was Kirsten’s chair. 
TANNER: Yeah, Brayden. 
MURRAY: You want to swap chairs with me? We can. 
BRAYDEN: Tanner, can I have the paper? Yeah. 
MURRAY: So, we’re almost to the end of our time. And before I end, 
I always like to ask everybody what they’re leaving with after our time 
165
Psychotherapy.net
together. Like if you learned anything new or experienced anything 
new. I’m just curious what you’re going to go home with. What do you 
think, Tanner? 
TANNER: Hmm. Well, uh, that my brother likes me a little more 
than I thought he did. And, I found out that, um, that my—that Mom 
and Dad feel a little bit—well, Mom does. She feels a little bit guilty 
that she has to study all the time and she’s not around. Well, she’s still 
around, but, she—
MURRAY: It’s hard for her. You know that it’s hard for her when she 
really wants to be with you. 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: Yeah? What did you learn about your dad? 
TANNER: Hmm. That he wants to have a stick. 
MURRAY:  
JAKE: Sticks are easy to find, Tanner. 
MURRAY: So maybe the same thing rings true with your dad, that 
you guys like to tease each other. 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: Yeah. Is that one way that you show your dad that you love 
him? 
TANNER: Mm-hmm. 
MURRAY: Yeah? 
RITA: John, I think this was a masterful example of Kirsten using 
family systems to work with this family. And I have to say, I was really 
impressed with the family and the courage of the family members to 
really allow her to do the sculpting and to feel the feelings they felt. It 
was really very moving. 
JOHN: Yeah. Yeah, I think Kirsten is very talented in the area, and the 
family was very impressive too. I think in the end, as we are kind of 
looking to the future, the family in this experience had more family 
cohesion and maybe some insights about the way they interact, and 
I think both of those things will be positive forces and factors as the 
166
COUNSELING & PSYCHOTHERAPY THEORIES: IN CONTEXT AND PRACTICE
family travels through time together in the future. 
RITA: I agree. 
  
1 
 
Therapy Session 10 
Annotated Transcript 
Judith Beck, PhD, and Abe 
From Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, 3rd Ed. 
 
MOOD CHECK 
Judith: 
Hi, Abe. How are you doing? 
Abe: 
Hi.  Pretty good. 
Judith: 
Oh, I'm so pleased to hear that. Can I just take a quick look? 
Abe: 
Sure. 
Judith: 
[looking at the scales Abe filled out] Oh, yes. This does look like you're feeling 
better. [pause] Great. 
 
UPDATE 
 
[Dr. Beck identifies what went well since the last session. This helps tap into 
Abe’s resilient adaptive mode, which may include anything he does for 
pleasure, engagement, relationships, meaning, or accomplishment. Abe’s report 
includes several steps he took as part of his Action Plan.] 
 
 
2 
 
How about if we do an update?  
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
So, what was good about the past week? 
 
[Abe identifies what he did in accordance with his values of family and 
accomplishment.] 
Abe: 
Well, some of the things that I've doing and working on are still going well. So, like 
still being in contact with the family. I contacted Charlie. Well, when I saw Charlie, 
I asked him if I could have some more hours and he said yes. So that made me 
feel good for a bunch of reasons. 
Judith: 
Oh, good. 
Abe: 
I called John and he seemed happy to hear from me, so that was good. 
Judith: 
You know, a couple weeks ago you were even afraid to ask Charlie for any hours 
at all. Remember that? Because you made a negative prediction about it. 
Abe: 
Because of the way that my last job ended I was afraid that nobody would give 
me any hours, or hire me, or want me at all. 
Judith: 
And then Charlie did, so I guess that prediction turned out to be wrong. And then 
sounds to me as if you did well enough that Charlie is willing to give you a few 
more hours? 
 
 
3 
 
[Dr. Beck identifies the result of Abe’s behavioral experiment: his negative 
predictions don’t always come true.] 
Abe: 
He did give me a few more hours and so far, that's going okay. 
Judith: 
Great. Do you feel like you've done a reasonable job working for Charlie? 
Abe: 
Oh, yeah. It's mostly labor, so it isn't hard mentally, it's just hard physically. But, 
yeah, I'm doing it and I show up on time and things are going well. 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck helps Abe draw a positive conclusion from his work experience.] 
Judith: 
So, what was good this week about working for Charlie? What did that mean, the 
fact that you'd done this? 
 
Abe: 
Well, the fact that I can get there on time, that I can do a good job. I think it builds 
my confidence a little bit just being back to work. Because I was really worried 
after the last job because of the way that ended, whether or not... 
Judith: 
Something bad might happen this time? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah. It doesn't sound like it has, is that right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. No, not yet. 
 
4 
 
 
[Dr. Beck accesses the memory of positive feelings, then asks Abe whether the 
experiences demonstrated his positive personal qualities.] 
Judith: 
Did it feel good to be productive? 
 
Abe: 
Oh, yeah. Yeah. 
Judith: 
And it sounds like you were on time so you were reliable? 
Abe: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes”] 
Judith: 
You did a good job in what you were doing? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
In fact, such a good job that he's willing to give you some more hours. 
Abe: 
Yeah. Well, it's summertime construction, he's got a lot of work. And so, the fact 
that I wanted some hours he seemed happy that I wanted them. 
Judith: 
That's great. And you reconnected with John because you'd also made some 
negative predictions about that, I think. 
Abe: 
Yeah. Yeah. So, I talked to him and he seemed happy to hear from me. 
 
5 
 
 
[Dr. Beck again asks the client to draw a conclusion after he provided additional 
positive information.] 
 
Judith: 
What do you make of that? 
 
Abe: 
I don't know. I guess things are okay with him and I was worried that because I 
hadn't called him or been in contact with him for a long time, I was afraid he'd 
just sort of written me off. 
 
[The client is close to accessing the positive adaptive mode but needs a little 
more help.] 
 
Judith: 
Uh-huh (nods “yes”]. As we talked about last week, of course, he hadn't called 
you either. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So it sounds like the two of you just let each other slip a little bit. 
Abe: 
Yeah, I guess that's right. 
Judith: 
And now you're back.  
 
[Dr. Beck asks about the negative consequences of believing his negative 
cognition.] 
 
6 
 
 
What would have happened if you had really bought into this automatic thought, 
"He's not going to want to hear from me"? 
Abe: 
I'll probably wouldn't have called him. 
Judith: 
No, I don't think you would have.  So, it's so good that you called him, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah. And it was taking a little bit of a risk there, right, because you really thought 
that he might not take too kindly to your call? 
Abe: 
Yeah.  
Judith: 
So you put yourself out there. That's good. 
 
[Dr. Beck reinforces his willingness to act counter to his automatic thought as 
evidence of self-control.] 
 
Is this another example of how you took control? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Because, well, like you said, I wouldn't have. 
Judith: 
Yeah. That's good.  
 
So, did anything else happen this week that I should know about? 
 
7 
 
Abe: 
No, not that I can think of right now. 
 
SETTING THE AGENDA 
Judith: 
So, let's set our agenda, what's the goal for today's session? Did you write 
something down about that? 
Abe: 
Yeah, since I've been writing lots of stuff down... My daughter's having a barbecue 
and her in-laws are coming and are going to be there. 
Judith: 
I see. 
Abe: 
And I'm worried about what they're going to think about me because of 
everything that's happened to me. 
 
[Dr. Beck clarifies what Abe’s goal is.] 
Judith: 
So is your goal to reduce your worry about seeing her in-laws? Or is it a different 
goal? 
 
Abe: 
Well, it's reducing the worry, but I don't know what to say to them. 
Judith: 
Oh, okay. So it's both?  I think we can figure out what to say, and if we do that, 
then that should reduce the worry. Is that right? 
Abe: 
 
8 
 
Yeah, probably if I knew... I mean, I just don't even have any idea what to say to 
them. 
Judith: 
I have some ideas. I think this is a pretty easy one. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
But an important one. Any other goals for this session? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
If you think of anything, let me know. 
Abe: 
No, that's the main thing. 
 
REVIEWING THE ACTION PLAN 
[Dr. Beck and Abe review the steps he was able to take in the previous week 
and his therapy notes. In the course of their discussion, Abe mentions two 
additional potential agenda items.] 
 
Judith: 
Okay. Can we take a look at your Action Plan?  
Abe: 
My Action Plan? Okay. Okay. 
Judith: 
 
9 
 
Do you want to start reading the Action Plan to me? 
 
[Abe starts by reading his therapy notes from the previous session.] 
Abe: 
If I think that I should be all better by now… 
Judith: 
Because that was the thought that you had had last week, right? 
Abe: 
Well, yeah. My thought was I shouldn't have been that bad in the first place. 
Judith: 
First place, right. That's true. 
Abe: 
I remind myself that I am somewhat better. 
Judith: 
That's true. 
Abe: 
I am somewhat better and I did that. 
Judith: 
You are. 
Abe: 
I straightened up my apartment. 
Judith: 
That took quite a while, didn't it? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
10 
 
Judith: 
And you got it done. 
Abe: 
Yeah. That reminds me of another thing if we have time. 
Judith: 
What's that? 
Abe: 
I was straightening up my apartment and I put some stuff out in the hallway, and 
one of my neighbors was upset that I put it there instead of taking it all the way 
down to the dumpster. 
 
[Dr. Beck questions Abe to clarify the goal.] 
Judith: 
So, the goal of this would be what? To talk to your neighbor, to feel better about 
the situation? 
Abe: 
No, I guess that I can tell you about that, but I don't think we need to spend time 
on that. 
 
[Now Dr. Beck knows that the incident with the neighbor does not need to be 
an agenda topic.] 
Judith: 
Okay. All right, so back to the Action Plan. So, you said you straightened up your 
apartment... 
Abe: 
I've worked a couple times in construction, okay? I've done that and that's gone 
well. I'm doing more with the kids and the family, been doing that. 
Judith: 
 
11 
 
Good. 
Abe: 
I've reconnected with, well, I was already connected with Charlie, but got more 
with him and reconnected with John. 
Judith: 
Right. 
 
[Abe reads from his therapy notes again.] 
Abe: 
I'm doing as well as could be expected for someone who was severely depressed 
in May. 
 
[Dr. Beck wants him to reflect on this idea.] 
Judith: 
What do you think about that? 
Abe: 
I don't know what the expectation would be, but I think I'm doing as well as I can. 
Judith: 
Good. That's good. 
 
[Abe acknowledges his progress.] 
Abe: 
I'm doing all the right things. I don't know. The things we talk about here I've tried 
to do. 
Judith: 
Excellent. 
Abe: 
 
12 
 
But it's still going to take longer until I'm feeling normal again. 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm (affirmative). Exactly.  
 
[Dr. Beck reinforces this therapy note by asking about its helpfulness.] 
 
Do you think it was helpful to read this, or it really just didn't make much of a 
difference? 
Abe: 
Oh, I think it was helpful during the week.  
 
[The Action Plan review has enabled Abe to access a more positive state of 
mind.] 
 
Right now, it just sort of seems like it all came and worked out the way it was 
supposed to. 
Judith: 
Excellent. 
Abe: 
So, I think it's okay. 
Judith: 
What else was on your Action Plan? 
Abe: 
Talk to Charlie, I did that. 
Judith: 
Good. 
Abe: 
 
13 
 
Keep looking for customer service jobs. 
Judith: 
Were you able to do that? 
Abe: 
Well, I did, but that's hard because you're filling out things online and you're not 
talking to somebody. And I don't really... They ask you for what you have been 
doing and I don't know how to explain what I've been doing for the past two 
years. 
 
[Dr. Beck proposes a new agenda item: how to explain what he has been doing 
so he can complete job applications .] 
Judith: 
So, is that something for our agenda? 
Abe: 
Yeah, probably. 
 
[Dr. Beck summarizes the goals for today’s agenda before returning to the 
Action Plan review.] 
Judith: 
We have the barbecue at your daughter's, and you'll see her in-laws. 
Abe: 
Her in-laws, yeah. 
Judith: 
And then filling out the job applications and what to say about not working. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
 
14 
 
And, let's see, were you able to keep giving yourself credit? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I'm doing that. 
Judith: 
That's good. 
Abe: 
Pretty good. 
Judith: 
And did you do a Testing Your Thoughts worksheet? 
Abe: 
I did. That was what I started to tell you. That was when I was cleaning my 
apartment and I put some of the stuff out in the hallway just until I had it all ready 
to go at the same time. And my neighbor complained to me. And initially when he 
started complaining, I thought that I was doing something wrong or should've 
done it differently, or whatever. But then I went through this and I sort of came to 
the conclusion, "No, I had a pretty good plan." 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
I was getting the stuff from the apartment to the hallway, and then it was all 
going to go from the hallway out to the trash bin. And it was in the middle of the 
day, it wasn't bothering anybody out there. 
Judith: 
Is this that neighbor who’s so picky? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
 
15 
 
Yeah. Sounds that way. But how great that you didn't let what he said affect you 
too strongly, is that right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Well, initially it did, but then I still got this and it reminded me I used this 
and thought, "Well, let me think this through." And since I had the form, I just 
went through it and did it. 
 
SETTING A NEW ACTION PLAN 
 
[It’s often helpful for clients to continue doing some parts of their Action Plan.] 
  
Judith: 
So, let's see, what from the Action Plan might you want to continue this coming 
week? I'm not sure you need to keep on reading this thing about, "I should be 
better by now." Sounds like that's pretty much in your head? 
Abe: 
I'm doing better. I'm doing better and I believe that. 
Judith: 
Yeah. So you already asked Charlie... 
Abe: 
Talked to Charlie. 
Judith: 
We're going to talk about the job applications. You're going to still keep the credit 
list? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I'd better. I'd better. 
Judith: 
And keep on doing some worksheets? 
 
16 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
When you need to. 
Abe: 
Yeah, because there's still, I still have weak moments. 
 
PRIORITIZING THE AGENDA 
Judith: 
Good. All right. So, we have the barbecue and we have the job applications.  
 
[It’s important to give clients another opportunity to think through what is most 
important to them to discuss at the session.] 
 
Is there anything that's even more important than those two things? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
So, which would you like to... Do you want to make sure we get to both of them, 
or if there's only time for one, how would you like to spend the time? 
Abe: 
Let's do the job applications because the barbecue is still a couple weeks away. 
Judith: 
A couple weeks away? Oh, okay. So if we don't get to it, it'll be all right? 
Abe: 
If we don't get to that today, that'd be all right. But the job applications, that's 
bothering me every day. 
 
17 
 
Judith: 
Good. Let's talk about that then. 
 
GOAL #1: FILLING OUT JOB APPLICATIONS 
 
[In this section, Dr. Beck enables Abe to take stock of what he has done in the 
past two years and to acknowledge his efforts. His tendency to discount positive 
information has been making it difficult for him to fill out the application.] 
 
Judith: 
It sounds like you were able to identify at least a couple of jobs, but then you got 
kind of daunted when you saw the application? 
Abe: 
Well, when it asked for prior employment and they ask you sort of do things by 
date. And then I've got this big hole, the past two years. 
Judith: 
Right. 
Abe: 
What do I put in there, you know? Dropped off the end of the earth? I mean, I 
don't know what to put in there. 
 
[Instead of immediately discussing this problem, Dr. Beck needs to gather more 
information to see whether there is any other difficulty they should also 
discuss.] 
Judith: 
And are there any other hard parts about the application? Or is that really the one 
that's bothering you the most? 
Abe: 
 
18 
 
Well, I have to explain why I left the last job, but, I mean, I know what to say 
there. I don't know what they're going to think about it, but I know how to explain 
it. 
Judith: 
Right. So you don't need my help with that? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
No. So let's talk about how you could fill in the application. Can I ask you some 
questions about this? 
Abe: 
Sure. 
Judith: 
If I remember right, when you first lost your job, you looked around a little while 
for new jobs and didn't find anything. 
  
[Dr. Beck needs to collect more information.] 
 
And then weren't you helping out Charlie back then? 
Abe: 
Yeah, a little bit. 
Judith: 
So you had a few days of helping with construction then? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
And you've had a few days recently? 
 
19 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers suggestions, acknowledging activities and experiences that the 
client may be inclined to discount.] 
Judith: 
I wonder whether you could put down that you've been working in construction? 
Abe: 
I can. 
Judith: 
Do you think Charlie would give you a good reference? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I think he would, but I haven't done a lot of work for Charlie. That's the only 
thing.  
Judith: 
Well, do you have to put on the application how much work you've done? 
Abe: 
Well... 
Judith: 
I suppose it could come up in a job interview, but how about just on the 
application? 
Abe: 
I'd be afraid to say that I'd been working the whole time for Charlie. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes”]. 
Abe: 
 
20 
 
I mean, because I haven't, and Charlie will tell them that. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
I mean, that I... So, I don't, I mean, I can tell them that, but I think I need to tell 
them more. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
I don't know, maybe? 
Judith: 
Is there even room on the application to explain like that? 
Abe: 
I don't know. 
Judith: 
One of the things that you could do is that you could just put down the date for 
two years ago, and the date of this year, and have one year with nothing. Unless 
you think that actually did work in that intervening year, you could put that one 
in, too. So, and if you put them down with commas, I think what that usually 
means to people is that it wasn't continuous or you would've said this year to that 
year. 
Abe: 
I think I could also put on there that I've done some volunteer work. 
Judith: 
Oh, yeah. That's good, too. 
Abe: 
So that it won't look like I just sat around the whole time. 
 
21 
 
Judith: 
That you just weren't doing anything. Right. So you're going to put down the work 
at the homeless shelter? 
Abe: 
The homeless shelter, yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah, that's good. 
Abe: 
And I've done a couple special project things. Well, this was before, well, with the 
church. I don't know if I can use that or not, but... Well, I can just say I did 
volunteer work and use the homeless shelter as a place. 
Judith: 
Right. And you could also say you did do some work at the church? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
You think that's been in the last two and a half years? 
Abe: 
I kind of dropped off church around that same time. 
Judith: 
Oh, okay. So just leave it off then. How does that sound? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I can say that I've done construction when it was available. I've done some 
work in the homeless shelter. 
Judith: 
Good. 
 
22 
 
Abe: 
I can say that. 
 
[Dr. Beck anticipates that Abe might need to explain why he didn’t have a 
continuous job for those two years.] 
Judith: 
Now, when you get an interview, do you think that the company that you're going 
to apply to has hired other people in the last couple years? 
Abe: 
Yeah, probably. 
Judith: 
Might be an expanding company, might not be, right? But I'm just wondering 
whether the job interviewer knows that it's more difficult for people to get jobs 
when they're in their 50's, than when they're in their 20's, and 30's, and 40's? 
Abe: 
They probably know it because they're the ones not hiring us. 
Judith: 
Exactly, right. And so I wonder whether, in your interview, you might be able to 
say honestly that you've been looking for a job, but that it's been difficult? 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
I don't think there's a place for that on the job application, but I thought maybe 
it'd be good for you start thinking about that. 
 
[Abe brings up another potential problem.] 
Abe: 
 
23 
 
I mean, the other thing about it is that my last, except for the last few months 
when I was there, I was working as a supervisor and then it makes it hard to go in 
to a new place and get a job as a supervisor. Nobody wants to hire... they want to 
hire you at entry level positions. And so, you can't just go over there and... But, if I 
could get a job in customer service, I mean, even if I had to start at the bottom, I 
think I'd be okay with that. 
Judith: 
That's good. 
 
[Dr. Beck identifies a potentially challenging situation. She provides the client 
practice responding to the challenge with an impromptu roleplay.] 
 
And do you have something good in mind that you can say if the interviewer says, 
"But you were a supervisor before and this is an entry level job." What would you 
say back? 
 
Abe: 
Well, but this in the area where I like to work and so I'm willing to take an entry 
level job. The problem that I had at my last job is that they moved me from 
customer service over to inventory, and I didn't know how to do that. I mean, 
there were computers and there were spreadsheets and stuff, and I didn't grow 
up with that stuff. I didn't know how to do that. So, as long as I was working at 
customer service, I was doing good. It's when they moved me to inventory that I 
had a problem. 
 
[Dr. Beck provides positive feedback about his answer.] 
 
Judith: 
Yeah. Oh, I think that's a great answer if an interviewer says, "What happened 
with the last job?" 
Abe: 
 
24 
 
Okay. 
 
[Dr. Beck asks the client for other potential obstacles that could get in the way 
this week.] 
 
Judith: 
What could get in the way of filling out the job application now? 
 
[Abe identifies an automatic thought that could interfere. But then he answers 
the thought himself.] 
 
Abe: 
Well, I mean, just that I would have the thought that even if I put down 
construction and volunteer work, that that won't be enough.  But, I mean, I think 
that that's the best plan I have right now, so I'll just put it down. I mean, I can't 
get any worse results than what I've already gotten. 
 
[Dr. Beck anticipates that the client will be more successful if he remembers his 
response.] 
 
Judith: 
Yeah. Do you need to write down, "If I think that they won't like my lack of work 
history, remind myself, ‘This is the best plan I have’ "? 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
Great. Anything else on job applications? 
Abe: 
No. I don't think so. 
 
25 
 
 
Judith: 
Can I just ask you one more question? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
What does it say about you as a person that you're willing to go into an entry level 
job? 
 
[Dr. Beck asks a question to draw out and activate a positive core belief.] 
Abe: 
People need to work.  
Judith: 
So it shows you- 
Abe: 
I mean, I think that work is important. I think that earning money is important. 
 
[Dr. Beck suggests several positive conclusions.] 
 
Judith: 
So you have a good work ethic? Some people would feel themselves too superior 
to take an entry level job. It doesn't sound like you have that sense about 
yourself? 
Abe: 
I would just be happy to be working again. 
 
 
 
26 
 
Judith: 
Yeah. So I think-- does that show that you're humble? That you have good values, 
that you would put productivity over superiority? 
Abe: 
I don't know if it means that or not but sounds good. 
 
[Dr. Beck and Abe make a collaborative decision to move on to the next agenda 
item.] 
 
Judith: 
Okay. Anything else on this, or should we talk about the barbecue? 
Abe: 
Talk about the barbecue. 
 
GOAL #2: THE BARBEQUE 
 
[First, Dr. Beck collects more information about the situation.] 
Judith: 
Okay. So it's in a couple of weeks? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
[Dr. Beck asks Abe if he has an image in his mind. Images are automatic 
thoughts in the form of a picture in the mind and can evoke strong emotion and 
give clients better access to their verbal automatic thoughts, if there are any.] 
 
Judith: 
And do you have a picture in your mind about what the barbecue is going to be 
like? 
 
27 
 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. I imagine I'm going to go there and then my wife and her family are sort of 
going to be talking and stuff. 
Judith: 
Your ex-wife? 
Abe: 
No, no. 
Judith: 
No, no. Your daughter? 
Abe: 
My daughter, I'm sorry. 
Judith: 
Oh, your daughter and her family? 
Abe: 
That my daughter and her family are going to be there and talking, and 
everything. And then I just sort of imagine that her in-laws are going to be sort of 
over on the side just talking among themselves. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
And that's going to be awkward and difficult to break into. And I'm going to walk 
in, my daughter will be happy to see me, and my son-in-law, too, but- 
 
[Dr. Beck wants to work with Abe on what he thinks the most difficult part of 
the experience will be. Her goal is to help him become confident that he can 
cope with this part of the experience.] 
 
28 
 
 
Judith: 
What do you think is going to be the most difficult moment for you? 
Abe: 
I think after I say hello to my daughter and her husband, and my grandkids, 
there's going to be a time when everybody recognizes that I've said hello to 
everybody, but I haven't done any talking with her in-laws. And I think that that's 
going to be a difficult moment. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes”].  
 
[Dr. Beck continues to collect information so she can conceptualize the problem 
and figure out where they might start working on it.] 
 
So, have you had difficulties in talking to them before? How often have you... Did 
you only see them at the wedding and not since? Or you've seen them 
periodically? 
Abe: 
Well, I probably saw them one or two times, but not regularly. It's not like we 
were ever friends. I mean, part of that was when I was married before we'd only 
do things with other people together. 
Judith: 
Right. 
Abe: 
So, I never really saw them or really got to know them that much. 
Judith: 
And when you did have a little bit of time with them, what was your impression of 
them? 
 
29 
 
 
Abe: 
They're perfectly nice people. They were okay. They seemed friendly. That was 
when I was working and when I felt normal. And now I haven't been for such a 
long time, I don't know what they're going to think about. 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm  [nods “yes”].   
 
[Dr. Beck identifies the emotion, anxiety and a potential distortion (mind 
reading).] 
 
What are you afraid they're going to think about you? 
 
[Abe identifies his automatic thought.] 
Abe: 
They're going to think that I'm just lazy, irresponsible. 
Judith: 
Do you have a picture in your head of them believing this about you? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Like I'm sitting there, once we get to that moment after I've said hello to 
everybody, then I sort of look over at them and they look back at me. And they 
have just this look on their face of disapproval. 
 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm  [nods “yes”].  
 
[Dr. Beck uses Socratic questioning to evaluate this thought. At this point, she 
doesn’t know to what degree Abe’s thoughts and images are likely are likely to 
be accurate or inaccurate.] 
 
30 
 
And do you have any evidence? Is there something that makes you think that 
they'll be critical of you? Or do you have any evidence that makes you think that 
they won't be critical of you? Or do you really just not know? 
Abe: 
I don't know. I just assume that everybody thinks that about me. 
 
[Dr. Beck asks questions to elicit evidence that is contrary to Abe’s idea.] 
Judith: 
Well, is that what John thought about you when you reconnected with him? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
Is that what Charlie thought? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
Is it what your kids have thought all along? 
Abe: 
No. 
Judith: 
No. So, is it what I think of you? 
Abe: 
No, but that's your job. 
Judith: 
Well, it is my job to try to look at things realistically.  
 
 
31 
 
[Dr. Beck acknowledges that she doesn’t know how valid Abe’s concern is, and 
turns Abe’s attention to whether he thinks it will be worthwhile to talk to his 
daughter’s in-laws, regardless of how they view him. Then she offers a 
suggestion about what he can say.] 
 
Now, I don't know how to look realistically about your daughter's in-laws. I don't 
know whether they're going to be critical or not. The question is, is it worth it to 
you to act as if you feel confident? And is it worth it to you to go up to them and if 
they ask, "What have you been doing lately?" you could say you've been working 
construction. You could say you're looking for, you'd like to get back into 
customer service, so you've been applying for jobs in that. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
[Dr. Beck asks a question to help Abe reassess how risky the situation now 
seems.] 
So, if you were to say that in kind of an upbeat way, what are the chances, do you 
think, that they'll be really critical of you? 
Abe: 
Not to my face, anyway. 
Judith: 
Yeah. And after you say that, if you want, you can just very quickly change the 
subject.  
 
[Dr. Beck anticipates that Abe may need practice so he can speak effectively 
with the in-laws but she gives him a choice about it.] 
 
Would you like to do a little role play on this? Do you want to be you or you want 
me to be you? 
 
 
32 
 
Abe: 
Sure. I should be me. 
Judith: 
And who am I? The wife or the husband? Who's easier to talk to? 
Abe: 
That's what I'm trying to... Probably the husband is easier for me to talk to 
because we can talk about sports and stuff. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's good. What's his name? 
Abe: 
It's a funny name. It's Elias. 
Judith: 
Elias? Okay. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
All right. I'm Elias, and do I come up to you or do you come up to me? 
Abe: 
Well, I mean, that's the question. So, I've said hello, I look over, I see them sort of 
looking. They're settled, so I guess I have to go over to you. 
 
[Dr. Beck suggests that Abe use the technique of “acting as if” he is thinking and 
feeling positively. Then she focuses on his facial expression and body language.] 
Judith: 
Okay. And remember now what I want you to do is to act as if you have 
confidence. Act as if you feel good about the fact that you're doing construction, 
 
33 
 
that you're looking for another job. Act as if you expect them to be nice to you. 
So, if you have that attitude, what does your face look like? 
 
Abe: [smiles] 
Judith: 
Like that, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
That smile, right? Kind of open, the smile. What does your posture look like? 
You're feeling confident about yourself. 
Abe: 
I guess I'd have to probably sit up straight. Or stand up straight. I'd stand up and 
go over and... 
Judith: 
So, you're coming to me, I'm Elias, so you're standing up straight, you're smiling, 
you come over to me and you say...? 
 
[Dr. Beck allows the client to generate the first line in the roleplay.] 
Abe: 
Hi, Elias, how you doing? 
Judith [as Elias]: 
Pretty good. 
Abe: 
Good. It's good to see you. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
 
34 
 
Abe: 
Haven't seen you for a long time. 
Judith: 
Nice to see you, too. You know I'm retired now and I have to tell you, I'm enjoying 
retirement. How about you? 
Abe: 
Well, I'm still in the game a little bit. I've been doing a little bit of construction and 
I'd like to get back into customer service if I could, so I've been looking at jobs 
with that. 
Judith: 
That's good. And I know you know even though the economy is booming,  it 
seems hard for people our age to get jobs. 
Abe: 
It's hard, yeah. People don't seem to want to talk to me. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
So, anyway. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's unfortunate. 
Abe: 
Well... 
 
[Dr. Beck interrupts the roleplay to make a suggestion.] 
Judith: 
Okay, how about if you change the subject now?  
 
 
35 
 
[getting back into the roleplay as Elias] Well, that's unfortunate. 
Abe: 
What do you think about the Phillies [baseball team] this year? 
Judith: 
I'm so disappointed. I have to tell you. After last season, I really thought they had 
a chance, but I don't know. They're not doing too well. 
Abe: 
Well, they've got some expensive players and I thought they'd do better, but... 
Judith: 
So, you going to any games? 
Abe: 
I haven't. I haven't yet. I'd like to some time, but I'd like to wait to see them do 
better, too. 
Judith: 
Yeah. I went to see a couple games early on, that's when they were doing well, 
but I haven't gone for a while either. 
Abe: 
Yeah. So, I don't know. Things don't look good for them right now. I don't know, 
maybe the Eagles [football team] have a better chance this year. 
Judith: 
Yeah, I hope so. I don't have to tell you I'm much more of a baseball fan, though, 
than a football fan. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck comes out of the roleplay to offer feedback on both words and body 
language. She anticipates the negative response the client might have to 
 
36 
 
feedback and offers compassion and understanding. She sets up another 
opportunity for practice.] 
Judith: 
Okay. Let's come out of role play. First of all, I thought everything you said was 
great. Second of all, you looked pretty depressed when you were telling me all 
this stuff. I'm wondering if we could just try it once more and have you try to feel 
confident? Let me ask you a couple questions. One of the things that you read 
about here was that you really have made a fair amount of progress. And that you 
are right where you should be, given how depressed you were last May. So, you 
are right on the road where you should be right now, Abe. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
The second thing is, look at how much more you're doing these days than you did 
before. And the fact that you're working construction and that you got extra days, 
boy, that to me shows you're really willing to work hard to get over this 
depression. 
 
[Dr. Beck provides more positive feedback.] 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
And the fact that you were able to fill out the Testing Your Thoughts worksheet, 
and that it worked, and it helped you feel better. The fact that you've gotten your 
apartment really straightened out. All those things are really great. 
Abe: 
Yeah. Okay. 
Judith: 
Now, let me ask you another question. Does Elias know that you've been 
depressed? 
 
37 
 
Abe: 
I don't know. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
I don't know what he knows. I don't know what they've told them.  
 
Judith: 
Right. But what do you think of trying to do this one more time, but with smiles? 
 
[Dr. Beck suggests smiling, so Abe will come across better to Elias. Also, facial 
feedback may enhance mood, activate a more positive mindset, and even 
facilitate a shift to a more adaptive mode.] 
 
Abe: 
All right. I'll try it. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers a more adaptive mindset.] 
Judith: 
Okay. So I think the attitude you have to have is that you're actually really glad to 
see Elias. You connected with him a little bit in the past, here's an opportunity to 
connect with him more strongly.  
 
[Dr. Beck asks the client to identify the benefits of connecting with Elias, which 
are linked to his values, then motivates him to push himself.] 
 
What would be good if you did connect with him more strongly? 
Abe: 
Well, we might do things more together as a family. 
 
38 
 
Judith: 
That's right. 
Abe: 
That would be, I mean, just make us all closer. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh  [nods “yes”].  Would it mean something to your daughter, do you think, if 
you got closer to her in-laws? 
Abe: 
Probably she'd like that. 
Judith: 
I bet she would like that. Yeah. So, is it worth it to really try to put yourself out 
there and be smiling? 
Abe: 
Okay. 
 
[Dr. Beck acknowledges the difficulty of the task.] 
 
Judith: 
It's hard, though, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
All right. So, you're going to get triple credit if you can do this. Okay, so here I am, 
I'm Elias, I'm sitting here with my wife. 
 
[The client begins the roleplay.] 
 
 
39 
 
Abe: 
So, I look over and I see you. I just sort of, “Hey, Elias. How you doing?” 
Judith [as Elias]: 
Pretty good. 
Abe: 
I haven't seen you for a long time. How have you been doing? 
Judith: 
Oh, pretty well. I'm retired now. 
Abe: 
Are you? 
Judith: 
Yep. Putter a lot around the house and stuff. How about you? 
Abe: 
I'm still trying. I've been doing a little bit of construction, and I'm actually trying to 
get back into customer service again because I really liked it when I used to do 
that, and I haven't done that. So, I've been putting in some applications and doing 
that. In the meantime, I've been doing a little bit of construction work, and 
volunteering, and things like that. 
Judith: 
Oh, good for you. 
Abe: 
So, that's... we'll see. We'll see how it all works out. But, anyway, what do you 
think about the Phillies this year? 
Judith: 
I'm so disappointed. I had high hopes after last season, but they're not really 
doing very well. 
Abe: 
 
40 
 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
I don't know. What do you think? 
Abe: 
Well, they've spent a lot of money on big-buck players who aren't paying off is 
mostly what it is. So, I don't know. I'd like to go to a game some time, but I don't 
want to spend the money on a game if they're just going to be as bad as they've 
been doing. 
Judith: 
Yeah. I don't blame you. 
Abe: 
I don't know, maybe the Eagles will be better this year. 
Judith: 
Oh, I think that's wishful thinking, Abe. After last season? 
Abe: 
Yeah, well. Well, maybe the quarterback thing straightened out at this point. 
Judith: 
Yeah, I hope so. 
 
[Dr. Beck ends the roleplay and provides feedback, emphasizing how much Abe 
improved.] 
  
All right. Let's come out of the role play. You did great. That was such a difference 
between the first one and the second one. 
Abe: 
It was hard. 
 
 
41 
 
Judith: 
And it was hard- 
Abe: 
I don't feel like I did that much better, but- 
 
[Dr. Beck provides evidence of improvement.] 
 
Judith: 
Oh, boy, I have to tell you, just looking at your face, your voice was louder. I don't 
know if you know. 
Abe: 
Yeah, it was louder. 
Judith: 
Right? You sounded as if you weren't afraid of what he was going to think. You 
sounded, you know, and you were just kind of matter-of-fact talking about 
construction and applying for new jobs. You weren't negative about it in any way. 
But you did a really good job.  
 
[Dr. Beck checks to see whether Abe needs help generating additional topics of 
conversation.] 
 
Do you have any other topics that you might talk to him with, about? 
 
Abe: 
I mean, sports. 
Judith: 
Sports? 
Abe: 
 
42 
 
I mean, we can always talk about the grandchildren. 
Judith: 
Yeah, that's a good one. 
Abe: 
That's always easy to talk about. And maybe even talk about going to some of 
their activities together, maybe. 
 
Judith: 
Oh, right. You might see them. 
Abe: 
Or see them there. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
I don't know how much he goes to. 
Judith: 
Any other topics? 
Abe: 
Well, our kids, of course,  and what they're doing, and how they're getting along, 
which is good. They're doing really good. 
Judith: 
Do they have other children, too? 
Abe: 
Yeah, they do. I think they have. I think two other daughters. 
Judith: 
So, you could always ask about them? 
 
43 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[offering another topic] 
Judith: 
You know what topic I find most people like to talk about is travel. So, have they 
been any place in the last couple of years? Or, are they planning to go someplace, 
or what's on their bucket list? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I have trouble talking about that because I haven't gone anywhere or done 
anything. 
Judith: 
So, if Elias were to say, "Oh, yeah, we're going to Mexico in a couple of months," 
what could you say back to that? 
Abe: 
“Where are you going to go? What are you going to do?” No, that would be okay 
if he would say that. 
Judith: 
That's great. And what's on your bucket list, Abe? Where would you like to go? 
Abe: 
I guess the thing is that travel hasn't been the thing that's been most important to 
me. It's just sort of I'm happy to stay close to home and be close with my family. I 
don't really think about going other places much. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers a way he can respond.] 
Judith: 
So, if he asks you, you can say that. You've never really had the travel bug. 
Abe: 
 
44 
 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah. Good. All right 
 
[Dr. Beck wraps up the discussion by asking the client to summarize key points.] 
 
So, what did we talk about in terms of Elias that you'd like to remember? 
Abe: 
Well, I think probably he'll be okay. I mean, he's certainly okay. 
 
[Dr. Beck anticipates that Abe may not remember his conclusion.] 
 
Judith: 
Want to write some of this down? 
Abe: 
Elias will probably be happy to see me. 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm  [nods “yes”].  
Abe: 
And we have common interests to talk about. 
Judith: 
That's true. 
Abe: 
Sports, kids, grandchildren. 
Judith: 
You could ask how he's spending his time in retirement.  
 
45 
 
 
[Dr. Beck prompts the client to write down something about how he wants to 
appear to Elias.] 
 
Now, you want to say anything [in your therapy notes] about your appearance? 
Abe: 
I don't know what you mean. 
Judith: 
How your face might look, what your posture might look like? 
Abe: 
Oh. I want to stand up straight, smile, talk loud enough. 
 
[Abe adds this to his Action Plan.] 
 
Judith: 
Talk with enthusiasm? I think it's easier to do when you're talking about your 
grandchildren. 
Abe: 
Yeah. Yeah. 
Judith: 
That's good. 
Abe: 
Much easier than the Phillies. 
 
[Dr. Beck motivates Abe to follow the Action Plan.] 
Judith: 
And why is it worth it to do this? What will it mean if you do this? 
 
46 
 
Abe: 
I mean, well, I mean it just ties into everything else that we've been talking about. 
And everything I've been doing. It's going to help me to just kind of be normal, 
and have a normal life again. 
Judith: 
Exactly. Do you want to write that down, or do you think that's really in your head 
now? 
Abe: 
I'll write it down. 
 
[Dr. Beck asks for conclusions and key points to remember with regard to the 
first agenda item.] 
Judith: 
And let's go back to the job application. What do you want to write down about 
that? 
Abe: 
That since my last job I want to be able to say that I haven't just been sitting 
around doing nothing. 
Judith: 
Right. So, when it says, "List what you're doing," what can you list? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I've been doing some stuff on construction, been volunteering, and I think 
the way that I would say that, I just want to get back to customer service because 
I was happy doing that. 
Judith: 
The application, do they give you any space to just say why you want the job, or 
talk about yourself? 
Abe: 
 
47 
 
I think it's--different ones are different. Usually, at the end they have a space 
where you can write something if you want to. 
Judith: 
So, this would be a great thing to write. 
Abe: 
Get back to customer service. 
Judith: 
That you really like to do that, you really enjoyed it when you were doing it, you 
did it so well you got made supervisor. But you're willing to do an entry level job. 
Abe: 
I'd do anything just because it's just important to me to work. 
Judith: 
Yeah. That might be good for you to put in the application, too, then if there's a 
space.  
 
[Dr. Beck realizes that job applications usually ask for references, so she makes 
a suggestion about that.] 
 
You know what, something that just occurred to me, is that Charlie was a... No, 
not Charlie. Sorry. Joseph was the boss who switched you to inventory, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
But he was new in the job, as I remember, right? Who was your supervisor, or 
boss, before Joseph? 
Abe: 
That was Dan. 
 
48 
 
Judith: 
Dan. And do you think Dan would give you a good recommendation? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I think he probably would. 
Judith: 
So, there may be a place on the application to say "references," maybe you want 
to give Dan's name and number? Might be good to call Dan, or email him or 
something, beforehand so he'll know to expect a call. Would you have any 
problem doing that? 
Abe: 
Some, but I think I can. 
Judith: 
You can get yourself to do it? That's great. So we're giving you some hard things 
to do. And I think the application won't be nearly as hard now that we've figured 
out what you could say. Might be pretty hard to talk to Elias, might be pretty hard 
to call Dan. Right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck acknowledges the difficulty of the tasks and associates completing 
difficult tasks with client strength.] 
 
Judith: 
You think you have the strength to be able to do this? 
Abe: 
I'll try. 
 
[Dr. Beck expresses her confidence in Abe, based on evidence she cites.] 
 
49 
 
Judith: 
I think you do. I think you do. I think it was pretty impressive how you were able 
to turn your mood around about your picky neighbor. I think it's been pretty 
impressive how much time you've been spending with your family. 
Abe: 
Picky neighbor was easier for me to figure out, I think. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
Because he irritates me. 
Judith: 
And the fact that you're working in construction, you're just doing so many good 
things now, Abe.  
 
[Dr. Beck gives Abe a chance to discuss something else, then asks about the 
Action Plan] 
 
Is there any last thing you want to talk about? You got your Action Plan firmly in 
your mind? 
Abe: 
No. I think, I mean, this is helpful. 
 
[Dr. Beck checks one last time for potential obstacles.] 
Judith: 
Good. Any problems you think doing this? 
Abe: 
 
50 
 
I don't know. I'll find out, but I'm going to do it. I mean, these are the kinds of 
things that, even though overall I've been doing better, these are the things that 
I've been stumbling on. 
 
[Dr. Beck reminds Abe again about how far he has come.] 
Judith: 
Yeah. And I don't think we could have worked on these things, to be honest with 
you, back in May. 
Abe: 
No. 
 
[Dr. Beck provides more positive reinforcement and asks Abe to reflect on what 
she has said.] 
Judith: 
The fact that we're even working on them now, I think, is really a testament to 
you of how hard you've worked, to be able to get to this point, even where you 
could even think about doing these things. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
You think I'm right about that? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I couldn't have talked about these in May. 
Judith: 
Yeah. And you're going to continue to give yourself credit because that's our 
standing thing and continue to do worksheet. 
Abe: 
I find it useful to just keep the rubber band handy- 
 
51 
 
Judith: 
Rubber band? Oh, good. That's good. 
Abe: 
... To just remind me to, at this point, it's gotten just sort of a reminder to do all of 
these things. 
 
[Dr. Beck thinks of a way to connect the meaning of the rubber band to one of 
Abe’s core values.] 
Judith: 
You know what I think this rubber band is? I think it's a "taking control" rubber 
band. Good.  
 
ELICITING FEEDBACK 
 
[Dr. Beck asks briefly for feedback. Because Abe has been upfront about giving 
her feedback in the past, she is confident he would let her know if anything had 
bothered him or if he wanted to do anything different in their next session.] 
 
Judith: 
Any feedback about the session? 
 
Abe: 
No. It was good. This was really helpful. 
 
Judith: 
Great. All right. Can I take my copy of the Action Plan then? 
Abe: 
Oh, yeah. 
 
52 
 
Judith: 
All right. Same time next week. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
Great. See you then. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
133
It is now time to put all the skills you have learned together! This exercise presents 
transcripts from two typical therapy sessions with the same client. The first transcript 
reflects a typical early cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) session. The second tran-
script reflects a typical midphase session. Each therapist statement is annotated to 
indicate which CBT skill from Exercises 1 through 10 is used. This transcript provides an 
example of how therapists can interweave different CBT skills in response to clients. 
Trainees may also elect to use parts or all of this exercise for practice. To assist with 
this, Appendix B includes a deliberate practice therapist diary form that can also be 
downloaded from the series companion website (https://www.apa.org/pubs/books/
deliberate-practice-cognitive-behavioral-therapy; refer to Clinician and Practitioner 
Resources).
Instructions
As in the previous exercises, one trainee can play the client while the other plays the 
therapist. As much as possible, the trainee who plays the client should try to adopt 
an authentic emotional tone as if they are a real client. The first time through, both 
partners can read verbatim from the transcript. After one complete run-through, try it 
again. This time, the client can read from the script while the therapist can improvise 
to the degree that they feel comfortable. At this point, you may also want to reflect 
on it with a supervisor and go through it again. Before you start, it is recommended 
that both therapist and client read the entire transcript through on your own, until the 
end. The purpose of the sample transcripts is to give trainees the opportunity to try 
out what it is like to offer the CBT responses in a sequence that mimics live therapy 
sessions.
Annotated Cognitive  
Behavioral Therapy Practice  
Session Transcripts
11
E X E R C I S E
https://doi.org/10.1037/0000256-013
Deliberate Practice in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, by J. F. Boswell and M. J. Constantino
Copyright © 2022 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
134	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Transcript 1
THERAPIST 1:  Hello, again. It’s nice to see you. We spent our last appointment discuss-
ing what has brought you here, your concerns, and some of your history. Based on our 
discussion, it sounds like you are most concerned about panic attacks, and your mood 
has also been pretty down of late, starting to feel a bit hopeless. Am I summarizing what 
we’ve discussed accurately?
CLIENT 1:  Yes. I’d say my biggest concern right now is the panic, but I can definitely see 
how that’s connected to my mood.
THERAPIST 2:  Right. That’s an insightful connection. So, based on that, my tentative 
agenda for today is to introduce and discuss a plan for working on those concerns, 
including beginning to set some short-term and longer term goals. Time permitting, I’d 
like to introduce a monitoring strategy. However, if there is anything else that you want to 
prioritize today, I want to make sure that we budget our time for that. (Skill 3: Negotiating 
a Session Agenda)
CLIENT 2:  I’m not sure what to add. Your plan sounds fine; I’m happy to defer to you.
THERAPIST 3:  OK. We can follow that plan and adjust as needed. I always want to be 
sensitive to unilaterally dictating how we spend our time in session. I’ll have some ideas 
for our agenda each week, but it’s best to discuss and plan it together. I can appreciate  
that therapy may be a bit of a mystery, so it might be less clear at this point what to 
prioritize without a bit more guidance. Does this make sense? (Skill 3: Negotiating a 
Session Agenda; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 3:  Sure. So how is this supposed to work?
THERAPIST 4:  Great question. In cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, we’ll be looking  
at your cognitions—that is, thoughts and your behaviors—to identify whether 
I can teach you some skills for managing them that will help you address your panic,  
Note to Therapists
First, remember to be aware of your vocal quality, tone, and nonverbal behavior. 
Second, as noted throughout this book, certain skills may be more relevant 
at different points in a course of CBT. In this first annotated transcript, we 
highlight an early treatment session example and focus more prominently on 
beginner (Exercises 1–4) and intermediate (Exercises 5–7) skills. In the second  
annotated transcript, we highlight a middle treatment session that more 
explicitly integrates intermediate and advanced (Exercises 8–10) skills. Inter-
estingly, among the covered skills, the advanced skills (Adherence Flexibility, 
Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures, and Responding to Client Resis-
tance) may become relevant at any point in the course CBT or a given session. 
Furthermore, both negotiating a session agenda and assigning and reviewing 
between-session activities are relevant for most CBT sessions. Across both 
transcripts, however, the therapist should not feel restricted to these when 
considering alternative responses.
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
135
anxiety, and low mood. Does that help answer your question? (Skill 1: Explaining Treat-
ment Rationale for CBT)
CLIENT 4:  Yeah, I’ve heard people talk about CBT and how it’s supposed to be good.
THERAPIST 5:  Yes, CBT is generally quite helpful for people struggling with anxiety and 
depression. This is a well-researched approach with substantial support for its effective-
ness; the support is particularly strong for panic disorder. Of course, each person is unique 
and experiences things differently. So, we’ll tailor what we do to best fit your needs 
and preferences, and make sure that we prioritize checking in to see what seems to be 
working or not working for you. (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2:  
Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 5:  How long will it take for this to work?
THERAPIST 6:  Another good question. The short answer is, it depends. Part of what I’d like 
us to discuss today is defining more concretely what it would look like or feel like if this is 
working or not working. I don’t want to put words in your mouth, but I assume that having  
fewer panic attacks would be a pretty straightforward indication. (Skill 1: Explaining 
Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 6:  Yep!
THERAPIST 7:  I realize it might be frustrating to hear that the number of sessions “depends.” 
CBT is generally built on a shorter term model that has a track record of effectiveness. 
CBT approaches for panic typically involve 10 to 12 sessions. However, each person is 
unique, and we’ll assess progress in various ways and adjust as needed. I expect that 
you’ll start to notice improvements in mood that coincide with progress in the areas 
of panic and anxiety, but we might also need to integrate other strategies that more 
directly address your mood. Is that tentative timeframe consistent or inconsistent with 
what you were expecting? (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT)
CLIENT 7:  Honestly, I don’t know what to expect. I guess I’m a little relieved to hear that  
I won’t be in therapy forever.
THERAPIST 8:  [laughs] No, you won’t be in therapy forever. In fact, an implicit goal of cog-
nitive behavioral therapies is to teach clients how to become their own therapists; people 
can learn different ways of understanding and responding to their experience that they 
can take with them and apply outside of the therapy context. Of course, as we’ve already 
touched on, what this looks like and the time that it will take depends on your goals and 
preferences. (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 8:  I just don’t want to feel anxious anymore. I’m tired of it.
THERAPIST 9:  I know it’s exhausting, and no one can blame you for wanting that. In cases 
like yours, we want to get the anxiety to more manageable levels, and that includes  
significantly reducing, if not entirely eliminating, your panic attacks. Is it more accurate to 
say that you have a goal of reducing anxiety? Or do you want to eliminate it altogether; 
never feeling anxious? (Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 9:  Well . . . never feeling anxious sounds pretty appealing to me, but I understand 
that that probably isn’t realistic.
THERAPIST 10:  Hmm. You’re right that it probably isn’t realistic. What if I said that anxiety 
isn’t inherently bad and, in fact, can be pretty helpful and adaptive? (Skill 1: Explaining 
Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
136	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
CLIENT 10:  I think I know what you’re getting at. Anxiety can help us focus, prepare for 
things.
THERAPIST 11:  Exactly! To be clear, I’m not minimizing the suffering that occurs when  
anxiety is frequent and intense. We do want to get the frequency and intensity down to 
more manageable and adaptive levels. Would you want to make that one of your goals? 
(Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2 Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 11:  Definitely.
THERAPIST 12:  OK. And related to this, I assume we’ll want to aim for a decrease in panic 
attacks and panic-related symptoms, correct? (Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 12:  Yes. I guess it’s just hard to imagine anything changing because I’ve been 
dealing with this for so long. I feel so hopeless.
THERAPIST 13:  I can see how it’s hard to picture how things might be different, and, at 
this point, there might be a part of you that’s overwhelmed by the work that’s ahead. 
And there is another part that brought you here, and that reality is not trivial and gives 
me hope for you. As we’ve already touched on, perhaps this feeling of hopelessness is 
itself a problem worth working on—to reduce or overcome as a goal in here. Do you have 
thoughts on that? (Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 13:  I would agree; it’s not that I have no hope. This helps me feel more optimistic 
that things can change.
THERAPIST 14:  That’s really important, and we can work with that optimism. I want to take 
a moment to frame what we’ve talked about so far; goals include getting anxiety to a 
more manageable level, reducing panic attack frequency, and increasing hope. These 
could be considered both long-term—that is, what we would want to see by the end of 
our work together—and medium-term goals. I wonder if we can make these even more 
concrete. What would you be doing differently if we were on the right track on these 
things? (Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 14:  Hmm. Well . . . that’s just the thing. I feel like my life is on pause right now. I’m 
not doing much of anything; it’s like the world is shrinking around me. I suppose . . . if I 
didn’t have to worry about panic attacks or anxiety, I’d go out more and do more things 
like have coffee with friends, exercise, go to movies.
THERAPIST 15:  Mmhmm. First, I want to highlight and table something that you just said—
“if I didn’t have to worry about panic attacks.” The worry about potential panic attacks 
and anxiety is interfering. Take going to the movies, for example. Is it the case that when 
you’re at home, you worry about having a panic attack, and that leads you to avoid going 
to the movies? (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors)
CLIENT 15:  Absolutely. That actually happened over the weekend when a friend texted 
me. I get so worked up that I actually start to panic at home, which sucks. If I’m panicking 
that much just thinking about the movies, then I’m definitely going to have a panic attack 
at the movies, so I’m just not going. I mean, that’s clearly a problem. And then I just feel 
more depressed and defeated.
THERAPIST 16:  I see. You’re painting a pretty clear picture for us. The fact that you can 
recognize the subsequent impact on our mood is pretty insightful. I’d like to understand 
what happens in this situation. The text from your friend comes in, and . . . (Skill 6: Working  
With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
137
CLIENT 16:  I see the text; for a split second, I get excited about the invitation. I then almost 
immediately think, “Oh, I can’t go.”
THERAPIST 17:  You think to yourself “I can’t go.” Any other thoughts? (Skill 5: Working With 
Cognitions)
CLIENT 17:  Um. “I’ll have a panic attack.” If I even make it into the theater, I won’t make it 
through without needing to leave.
THERAPIST 18:  Has that scenario actually happened before? (Skill 5: Working With  
Cognitions)
CLIENT 18:  Yes, it did happen once, which was enough.
THERAPIST 19:  OK. So, you’re having these thoughts. What about physical symptoms? Is 
anything happening in your body? (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions)
CLIENT 19:  Yeah, pretty simultaneously, my heart starts racing, I get really hot and start 
sweating, I get short of breath. I wouldn’t call it a full-blown panic attack, but it does 
escalate until I text back and decline with some lame excuse.
THERAPIST 20:  OK, so you’re noticing specific thoughts and physical sensations; it isn’t 
entirely clear which comes first, but it sounds like they influence one another and kind 
of ramp up the intensity until you do something, like decline or cancel. (Skill 5: Working 
With Cognitions; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 20:  That’s exactly it. That’s pretty much the same scenario for other situations too.
THERAPIST 21:  And then you send the text to decline, and what happens? (Skill 6: Working 
With Behaviors)
CLIENT 21:  Immediate relief. The symptoms start to go away, although not completely. 
But then I just feel bad. Like, “what a loser . . .”
THERAPIST 22:  So declining the invitation, or avoiding the movie, instantly reduces 
the intensity of the anxiety. Shortly after, however, there is another set of thoughts  
and feelings—telling yourself “I’m a loser” and feeling more, what, sad than anxious? 
(Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working 
With Emotions)
CLIENT 22:  Yeah, that feels more like sad or depressed, in that moment. And gets back to 
that feeling of hopelessness.
THERAPIST 23:  Got it. OK, you’re already thinking like a CBT therapist. Let’s put a frame-
work on what you’ve just described. There is an event—something that we often label 
an antecedent—and then you have a response that’s comprised of an interaction among 
particular types of thoughts, physical sensations, and behaviors. In the moment, that mix 
of components is experienced more globally as “bad” or “anxious.” The thoughts and 
feelings are aversive—and understandably so—and based on learned experience; the 
most efficient way to stop or remove that negative state is to avoid—in this case, decline 
the invitation to the movies. The consequence of that involves a new set of thoughts, 
physical feelings, and behaviors. Perhaps most importantly, that avoidance brings a sub-
jective sense of relief. Am I getting this right? (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for 
CBT; Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working 
With Emotions)
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
138	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
CLIENT 23:  Mmhmm.
THERAPIST 24:  OK, I’m going to map these parts out on this form [walks through form 
with client]. That feeling of relief is part of what we call negative reinforcement. It’s the 
same principle at play when you have a headache and take an aspirin or ibuprofen. You 
know that when you take that medication, that will eliminate the headache. Even if not 
completely in your awareness, you know that when you decline that invitation, avoid the 
movies, avoid the coffee date, you will decrease the anxiety and reduce worry about a 
potential panic attack. It seems like a pretty logical and effective way to feel better and 
avoid expected danger. At a basic level, this learning process is adaptive. However, there 
are also costs, right? (Skill 6: Working With Behaviors)
CLIENT 24:  I don’t want to just avoid ever leaving my apartment! What kind of life is that? 
And I just end up getting more depressed.
THERAPIST 25:  Right. Your frustration is clear. The good news is that I’m confident that 
this approach will help you. Getting back to goals, would it make sense to identify doing 
more of things like accepting invitations to get out of the house or avoiding the anxiety- 
driven urge to avoid, as a reasonable marker of progress? (Skill 2: Establishing Goals)
CLIENT 25:  Definitely. That would be great.
THERAPIST 26:  Excellent. Then I have a suggestion for a few things that you can do 
between today and our next appointment. Can we finish by discussing that before 
we stop today? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session Activities)
CLIENT 26:  Sure.
THERAPIST 27:  First, I suggest that you review this document that explains a bit more about 
the “panic cycle,” which is the experience that you described quite clearly in your example 
here today. [Hands client the document] Second, I’m giving you two blank versions of 
the form that we completed in here today, where we broke down, labeled, and recorded 
the different parts of the panic response to the movie invitation [hands client the forms]. 
On one form, I suggest thinking back to either the first or the most intense panic attack 
that you experienced and breaking the components and experiences down on the form. 
On the second form, if you happen to experience a panic attack in the next week, then 
break it down and record it in the same way—antecedent or situation, thoughts, physical 
sensations, and behaviors, as well as what you noticed immediately afterward. How does 
this sound? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session Activities)
CLIENT 27:  That sounds doable, I guess; but how, exactly, will this help me?
THERAPIST 28:  I appreciate that the usefulness of completing these forms might not be 
clear. In short, recall that we started by recognizing feeling “bad,” “anxious,” “panicky.” 
That is the more common subjective experience. We want to start by introducing a  
different way of noticing and reflecting on your experience. Isolating the components 
and how they relate to one another will help us to better understand your patterns; in 
turn, that will help us tailor our treatment plan. The forms can help provide a structure or 
prompt for that, as well as document what happened during the week, which is useful 
for the next session. Does that make sense? (Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 28:  Yeah, that makes sense. Basically a way to practice independently what we 
did together today?
THERAPIST 29:  Once again, you’ve said it better and more concisely than me.
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
139
CLIENT 29:  [laughs]
THERAPIST 30:  Do you anticipate anything might make it difficult to complete these steps 
over the next week? It’s also important to remember that we’re just getting started; this 
isn’t something that you’re expected to be a pro at right away, and this isn’t something 
that gets “graded.” (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session Activities)
CLIENT 30:  I’ll definitely give it a try. I guess I’m wondering what I should do if I don’t have 
a panic attack between today and the next session?
THERAPIST 31:  Well, first, that would be great. Second, then you could use one form to 
record the first panic attack that you can recall and the second form to record a previous 
panic attack that sticks out in your memory. Or—and I don’t want to overwhelm you 
with options—you could record your experience at a time when you are feeling more 
depressed. Do those options make sense? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between- 
Session Activities)
CLIENT 31:  Yes, that makes sense.
THERAPIST 32:  OK, great. It seems like you’re ahead of the game at this. Breaking things 
down and seeing how the different parts of our experience are connected helps us 
understand the problem and what might be done to address it. Once we get the basics 
of this monitoring down, we’ll start building on it with other strategies. And you’ll see 
how thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are connected and why what we do in here tends 
to boil down to strategies that more directly address thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. 
(Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT)
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Transcript 2
THERAPIST 1:  Here’s what I’m thinking for our agenda today, and, as always, let me know 
your preferences and anything you want to add or prioritize. We can start by discussing 
your experience with the monitoring. Depending somewhat on where that takes us, I’d 
like to focus more explicitly on the physical sensations associated with your panic attacks 
today. This will include doing some exercises, and based on what we learn from those, 
we can come up with a plan for the next week. How does that sound? (Skill 3: Negotiating 
a Session Agenda; Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session Activities)
CLIENT 1:  That sounds good. I forgot my monitoring forms, but I think I’m getting the 
hang of that. To be honest . . . [nervous laughter] . . . I’m already getting anxious about 
the exercises you mentioned.
THERAPIST 2:  Oh, OK. Why don’t we just focus on that for the moment? What do you 
notice in your body right now? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 8: Adherence Flexi-
bility; Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 2:  My heart is starting to race.
THERAPIST 3:  Anything else? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 3:  Feeling in the pit of my stomach, getting hot.
THERAPIST 4:  OK. I know it isn’t easy, but try to sit with those sensations right now. 
What thoughts are you noticing? (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working 
With Emotions)
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
140	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
CLIENT 4:  Umm. That I can’t handle this. I’m going to have a panic attack. I’m going to 
pass out in this office . . .
THERAPIST 5:  OK. You clearly are getting the hang of monitoring, nice work. Notice any 
behaviors or urges? (Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 5:  I guess restlessness; I don’t really want to be here right now. I’m not sure if this 
counts, but I’m also working pretty hard to calm down. Maybe that’s a thought—“I gotta 
get this together.”
THERAPIST 6:  Yes, I’d label the latter a thought. So your mind is working hard to control, 
what, your symptoms? (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 6:  Um, yes. To control the panic symptoms—get them under control so I don’t 
full-blown panic.
THERAPIST 7:  I see. Not for nothing, but you’re doing a pretty good job of continuing the 
session—you haven’t run out of the room and we’re carrying on a coherent conversation. 
(Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions)
CLIENT 7:  I suppose that’s right. It’s taking a lot of effort . . .
THERAPIST 8:  I appreciate that. We’ve already discussed this at some length, but is it fair 
to say what’s happening now is pretty typical? (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 6: 
Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 10: Responding to Client 
Resistance)
CLIENT 8:  Definitely. In other contexts, though, this would probably escalate to a full-
blown attack.
THERAPIST 9:  Can you say more about that? The importance of context? (Skill 6: Working 
With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 9:  I guess there’s something about being in the session, in this office, that makes 
this feel a bit more manageable than when I feel this way outside of here.
THERAPIST 10:  That makes sense and will be important to keep in mind for our work in 
here. We want this to generalize to your everyday life. If you don’t have specific questions 
or concerns about the monitoring, I think we can actually fold most of that work into the 
rest of the session. Would that be OK? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session 
Activities; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 10:  Sure.
THERAPIST 11:  OK. You’ve already provided a lot of useful information today, which serves 
as a good segue. Do you remember our discussion of the panic cycle and how panic 
is actually learned fear of physical sensations? (Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: 
Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 11:  Yes.
THERAPIST 12:  Great. Based on the panic symptoms that you’ve endorsed and what you 
described so far today, we already have a decent working understanding of the nature of 
this fear. That’s important because everybody is a little bit different in their experience of 
panic symptoms. I could be wrong, but I have a hunch that your reaction to mentioning 
“exercises” on today’s agenda might be related to our plan to focus heavily on exposure 
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
141
in here. (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2: Establishing Goals; Skill 10: 
Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 12:  Probably. Things are already getting more intense as you talk about it.
THERAPIST 13:  Things, meaning the sensations that you mentioned before? (Skill 7: Working  
With Emotions)
CLIENT 13:  Yep.
THERAPIST 14:  OK. Well, the idea would be to work directly with those sensations today. 
Recall that there are different types of exposure. For example, you’ve mentioned that you 
try to avoid going to crowded movie theatres because you might have panic symptoms, 
and we’ve talked about the importance of facing that situation as an alternative to avoid-
ing it. With panic attacks, the sensation of a racing heart is similar to the movie theatre. We 
similarly want you to face that physical sensation as an alternative to avoiding or working 
desperately to control it. When the exposure focuses on an internal physical sensation— 
racing heart, nausea, dizziness, etc.—that’s called interoceptive exposure. (Skill 1: Explaining  
the Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 2: Establishing Goals; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors;  
Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 14:  I read about this and I don’t like it . . .
THERAPIST 15:  That’s important. Can you help me understand more about that? (Skill 9: 
Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures; Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 15:  I mean . . . it makes me more anxious and panicky thinking about. I’m not sure  
I can do it, at least not right now. I know it’s not logical but . . . I could lose it.
THERAPIST 16:  Lose it, meaning feel out of control? Pass out? (Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions)
CLIENT 16:  Yes, all that.
THERAPIST 17:  If we just hit the pause button for a moment, I think it’s important to rec-
ognize the process that’s unfolding right in front of us. Concerns about future symp-
toms bring on a specific set of symptoms; in awareness, these in turn just provide 
evidence that there is something dangerous happening or about to happen. You say 
it isn’t logical. At one level, that might be true. However, it’s perfectly understandable 
given how strong emotions motivate certain thoughts and behaviors. (Skill 5: Working 
With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 9: Responding to Therapeutic 
Alliance Ruptures)
CLIENT 17:  I know . . . [seems distant, irritated]
THERAPIST 18:  Mmhmm. Yes, I know you know it well. I want to be clear that, in pointing 
this out, I don’t mean to be patronizing. It’s also not my intention to minimize your dis-
tress or work from the assumption that being aware of these patterns will, on its own, 
directly lead to something different. I have ideas about what would be most helpful, but 
I also want to be sensitive to what you need and keep this work collaborative. (Skill 9: 
Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures)
CLIENT 18:  I understand. I appreciate that. I actually want you to push me a bit—I signed 
up for that. It also occurs to me that this is a common reaction for me. I get irritated when 
people encourage me to “just push forward.” They’re just trying to be helpful, but . . .  
I don’t know.
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
142	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
THERAPIST 19:  I don’t want to put words in your mouth . . . they’re just trying to be help-
ful, but they don’t . . . really understand? (Skill 9: Responding to Therapeutic Alliance  
Ruptures)
CLIENT 19:  Yeah. They don’t know how bad it feels [quiet, does not make eye contact]
THERAPIST 20:  What’s happening right now? It seems like there was a shift. (Skill 7:  
Working With Emotions; Skill 9: Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures)
CLIENT 20:  [tearing up] I’m not sure. Suddenly feeling sad, weirdly. Maybe . . . hopeless 
again.
THERAPIST 21:  I wonder if the experience of others not understanding . . . maybe that  
disconnect brings up these feelings? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 9: Responding 
to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures)
CLIENT 21:  I think that’s right. It’s also that I am the one being unreasonable.
THERAPIST 22:  I see. So there is also maybe placing the blame on yourself, a sense of guilt? 
(Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 22:  Yes, guilt. There it is again.
THERAPIST 23:  OK. Now, let’s stay here for a moment. What do you notice in your body? 
(Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 23:  My body? I feel kind of heavy, tired; chest feels tight; stomach is queasy. I want 
to curl up in a ball.
THERAPIST 24:  I see. Shoulders slumping . . . I can see that heaviness playing out. . . . 
Notice how physical sensations aren’t just relevant to anxiety or panic; these experiences  
are also important for our work. Let’s take that feeling of heaviness, for example. On  
a scale from 0 to 10, with 10 being the most intense, how would you rate the intensity of 
the heaviness? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 24:  Umm. Probably a 6. I’d say when it’s really bad, usually more like a 7 or 8.
THERAPIST 25:  OK. How much are you bothered by that feeling of heaviness on the same 
0 to 10 scale? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 25:  Bothered . . . do you mean like annoyed?
THERAPIST 26:  More or less. Subjective sense of distress, annoyance. (Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions)
CLIENT 26:  Probably a 7.
THERAPIST 27:  OK, so pretty bothered or distressed by this heavy feeling. Now, on the 
same 0-to-10 scale, how similar is this feeling of heaviness to other times when you feel 
sad or guilty? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 27:  Oh, that’s a 10, easy. When I’m feeling depressed, I feel totally weighed  
down . . . not sure how else to describe it.
THERAPIST 28:  This is incredibly helpful, thanks. It might be easier to see how physi-
cal sensations connect to panic, but the same principle holds here. Feeling heavy and 
weighed down is associated with feeling sad, guilty, or a generally depressed mood.  
It also naturally leads to a specific set of behaviors or action tendencies—to curl up,  
withdraw, retreat. (Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
143
CLIENT 28:  Yeah. I feel like my life right now is just ping-ponging back and forth between 
panic and depression.
THERAPIST 29:  Mmhmm. I know you want to prioritize working on the panic attacks, and 
we’ll continue to do so. But, as we’ve talked about, we can feed two birds with one 
scone. In fact, what we just did with your feelings of sadness and guilt—the ratings of 
intensity, distress, and similarity—is pretty close to the exercise that I had planned for 
today. (Skill 2: Establishing Goals; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 29:  Really?
THERAPIST 30:  Yes. The only differences are that I was planning for us to focus on anxiety  
and panic and had a slightly more structured approach in mind. (Skill 8: Adherence  
Flexibility)
CLIENT 30:  I see. Sorry for getting us off track.
THERAPIST 31:  Whose therapy is this anyway? [slight smile] It seems like you’re still in the 
self-blame zone? (Skill 9: Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Rupture)
CLIENT 31:  Ugh. Yeah, that seems true.
THERAPIST 32:  OK. From my perspective, there isn’t anything to feel sorry about here. In 
fact, we ended up covering some really important ground, and, because of this, I think 
we’re working toward a better understanding of this experience of sadness and guilt as 
it relates to your panic attacks. It’s also important to remind ourselves that this is not a 
linear process. . . . With that said, can you guess where we’re going with this? (Skill 8: 
Adherence Flexibility; Skill 9: Responding to Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures)
CLIENT 32:  Hmm. Take a look at my panic symptoms and go through those rating steps?
THERAPIST 33:  Exactly. And outside of evoking them naturally, as happened when I brought 
up the exercises at the start of the session, and you noticed your reactions, we have  
some more structured assessment steps to identify what’s going to be most relevant and 
helpful to you, specifically. (Skill 3: Negotiating a Session Agenda)
CLIENT 33:  What’s involved in the more structured assessment?
THERAPIST 34:  Good question. One example is practicing hyperventilation—intentionally 
bringing on the physical symptoms associated with that and conducting a similar type 
of assessment. (Skill 3: Negotiating a Session Agenda; Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 34:  Intentionally hyperventilate?!
THERAPIST 35:  I know it seems strange. Similar to the sensations of feeling weighed down, 
provoking panic symptoms allows us to more directly assess their nature and similarity to 
typical experience. Certain symptoms will be more or less relevant to you, in particular, 
and we want to “diagnose” those. Then, recall that we can think about racing heart just 
like we think about going to the movies. Targeted interoceptive exposure can help extin-
guish the distress that you experience when you perceive heart rate changes. After some 
work on this, the levels of intensity might end up being in a similar range because these 
symptoms are part of our natural, biological response; however, we want to help you get 
less caught up in them, short-circuit the cycle, and help you make it to the movies. Does 
that make sense? (Skill 1: Explaining Treatment Rationale for CBT; Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions; Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 35:  Yeah, that makes sense.
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
144	
	
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Skills
THERAPIST 36:  In the time we have remaining, are you open to trying this? (Skill 8: Adher-
ence Flexibility)
CLIENT 36:  Yes. And no [chuckles]. I mean, yes, but I’m nervous.
THERAPIST 37:  I would fully expect that, and we’ll take it one step at a time. So, when I say 
hyperventilate, this is what I mean [demonstrates hyperventilation by breathing in and 
out forcefully and rapidly]. When I say “begin,” we will hyperventilate together until I say 
stop. It’s important to keep going until I say stop. It will likely be uncomfortable. If you 
feel compelled to stop, I ask you to jump back into it as soon as possible and continue 
until I stop. Please try to stay with it. All set? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 10: 
Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 37:  As much as I can be.
THERAPIST 38:  OK. Begin [both begin hyperventilating; when the client appears to 
struggle or slows down, the therapist gestures for the client to keep going and stay with 
it] (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility)
CLIENT 38:  [about 30 seconds in] I can’t. [trying to catch breath] I can’t do it anymore. 
I’m going to pass out.
THERAPIST 39:  I know it’s hard. Try to keep going for a few more seconds. I’m with you on 
this [continues for another 30 seconds; client does reattempt but seems to be holding 
back a bit]. OK. Now let’s breathe normally, keep our eyes open, and look straight ahead. 
What did you notice? (Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With Emotions; 
Skill 8: Adherence Flexibility; Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 39:  Racing heart; difficult to breathe; throat started to hurt; dizzy.
THERAPIST 40:  OK. How intense, 0 to 10? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 40:  A 10!
THERAPIST 41:  How much distress, 0 to 10? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 41:  Well, I stopped, so probably a 9 or 10.
THERAPIST 42:  Similarity with a typical panic attack? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 42:  Pretty similar, though not entirely. I would say racing heart, shortness of breath, 
and dizziness are definitely similar; other sensations maybe less so.
THERAPIST 43:  Great. You did a fantastic job. Did you know that you made it a whole addi-
tional 30 seconds? (Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 43:  No way. Wow.
THERAPIST 44:  Yep. By the way, I always find that pretty intense myself. I also get a racing 
heart. I also notice that I get overheated and tingly, and then suddenly get kind of cold 
and clammy. The cold air also bothers my throat. I’ve done this hundreds of times and 
those symptoms really don’t change for me. (Skill 7: Working With Emotions; Skill 10: 
Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 44:  Right, but you aren’t as bothered by them.
THERAPIST 45:  I think that’s the important difference. Don’t misunderstand; I don’t partic-
ularly love it, but I’ve learned that this is the expected response, it dissipates relatively 
Copyright American Psychological Association. Not for further distribution.
Annotated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Practice Session Transcripts  	
	
145
quickly, and it has yet to lead to anything catastrophic. (Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; 
Skill 7: Working With Emotions)
CLIENT 45:  Makes sense. I’m noticing that things are normalizing already.
THERAPIST 46:  Yep. Noticing the clock, let’s think about what to work on between today 
and the next session. You’re now an expert at intentional hyperventilation. It seems the 
symptoms that were evoked from this are largely similar to a typical panic attack, so that 
means that we want to keep focusing on this. I’d like you to set aside some time each 
day over the next week. Hyperventilate for 1 minute and record your experience on this 
form here [shares the form]. I’d like you to repeat that at least five times in a row, within 
the same sitting, likely around 15 minutes of work start-to-finish. What do you think about 
that? Is that feasible? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing Between-Session Activities)
CLIENT 46:  It’s definitely feasible in terms of the time commitment, but I’m not sure that 
I can go the full minute.
THERAPIST 47:  That’s an important point. First, it’s important to aim for a minute, and, just 
like today, if you do end up stopping at any point, get back into it as quickly as possible. It 
will also be useful to pay attention to the thoughts that come up before, during, and after 
each trial. One of the most important things is when your brain is telling you to “stop!,” 
you keep going beyond that red line. That “stop!” could show up after 15  seconds, 
30  seconds, or 45  seconds, but you keep going. (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing 
Between-Session Activities; Skill 5: Working With Cognitions; Skill 7: Working With  
Emotions; Skill 10: Responding to Client Resistance)
CLIENT 47:  I’ll definitely try my best.
THERAPIST 48:  It’s also important to set a timer with an alarm that is not immediately  
visible during the exercise. People often end up watching the time for reassurance, 
and that can undermine progress. Is that feasible? (Skill 4: Assigning and Reviewing 
Between-Session Activities; Skill 6: Working With Behaviors; Skill 7: Working With 
Emotions)
CLIENT 48:  Sure, I can set my watch and set it aside.
THERAPIST 49:  You really did some amazing work today.
CLIENT 49:  Thanks.
1 
 
Therapy Session 2 
Annotated Transcript 
Judith Beck, PhD, and Abe 
From Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Basics and Beyond, 3rd Ed. 
Judith: 
Hi. Good to see you again. 
Abe: 
Hi. 
 
MOOD CHECK 
Judith: 
Can I take a look at your scores? 
Abe: 
Sure. 
Judith: 
While I'm looking at these, just tell me, in your own words, how you've been 
feeling this week. 
Abe: 
Well, I would say I think a little bit better. I don't know if I know exactly why, but I 
feel a little bit better.  
 
[Dr. Beck will return to why he thinks he’s a little better to reinforce the idea 
that the change is due to his change in thinking and behavior.] 
 
2 
 
When I woke up in the morning, I was able to get up more easily. I think that 
when I was just reading the paper, even the sports section, I felt like I was able to 
concentrate a little better. 
 
[Dr. Beck uses this positive data later and provides positive reinforcement 
throughout the session.] 
Judith: 
Oh, that's wonderful. I'm really glad to hear that. It looks like you're sleeping 
better too? 
Abe: 
Well, I think that what I meant by that was mostly that I didn't oversleep. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
Because I had been spending a lot of time in bed. I would say I got up at 7:00 a.m., 
but I didn't really get up at 7:00 a.m. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's great. That's great. Looks like your concentration on things, like reading 
the newspaper, you said, that's a little better, too? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Oh, I'm really glad. You said you don't have any idea as to why you're feeling 
better? 
Abe: 
Maybe that's not entirely fair. Maybe it's because of the things that we're doing 
here that are helping. 
Judith: 
3 
 
Oh, that's great.  
 
SETTING THE AGENDA  
 
We'll get to those things in just a minute, but let's set the agenda. What would be 
your goal for today's session? 
Abe: 
Well, I guess to start thinking about working on the things that make it difficult for 
me to do things to get better. Like we talked about going out and doing things. 
And last time we talked about what I would like to be doing, like by Labor Day. 
 
[Having Abe think concretely and create an image about how his life could 
improve by a certain date gave him hope that his life could get better.] 
Judith: 
What's something that you would like to be able to do, but you've been having 
trouble doing? With something, either going out, or in the apartment. 
 
[“Thinking about working on difficult things is too broad,” so Dr. Beck helps him 
be more specific.] 
Abe: 
Well, it's kind of like the evenings are really hard for me because even if I go out 
and do something, then at the end of the day, I go back and I'm there by myself. 
Then I'm just sort of there with my thoughts. 
 
[Dr. Beck labels the goal as “evenings,” that is, to change his behavior and 
thinking at those times.] 
Judith: 
Good, okay, so we'll try to get to evenings. Anything else? Any other goals you 
have? 
Abe: 
4 
 
I would say that that's probably the main thing. Well, I should do something about 
my apartment. I don't keep after that like I should. 
Judith: 
You want to get your apartment in better order? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
But that seems like such a big job. I don't know where to start. 
 
[Dr. Beck emphasizes teamwork.] 
Judith: 
Well, maybe we could figure out together where to start. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
That sounds good.  
 
[Dr. Beck keeps track of what they’re doing and then contributes to the agenda 
herself.] 
 
So, we're setting the agenda. I'd also like to talk a little bit more about these 
depressing thoughts that you've been having, and talk some more about credit, if 
that's okay. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
 
 
5 
 
 
REVIEWING THERAPY NOTES: PART ONE 
 
[It’s not enough for clients to read the therapy notes on their Action Plans 
(formerly called homework) every day. It’s important to reinforce them in 
future sessions by asking for their reaction to them. In this part of the session, 
Dr. Beck asks Abe about his therapy notes from the evaluation session, which 
had been two weeks before the current session.] 
Judith: 
What I'd like to do next is just to turn to the notes from, actually, from the 
evaluation, and then the notes from last session. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
(being collaborative) If it's all right, I'll just read this and I'd like you to tell me 
what you think about this now. "When I start to feel more depressed, remind 
myself that the therapy plan makes sense." Does it still make sense to you? 
Abe: 
Yes, it does. 
Judith: 
"With Judith's help, I'll be working toward goals every week, step by step. I'll learn 
how to evaluate my thinking, which might be 100 percent true, or zero percent 
true, or someplace in the middle." What do you think about that? 
Abe: 
Well, I think the idea of working toward goals every week is a good idea. I think 
that your helping me to figure out what those things are is good. If I evaluate my 
thinking, which may be 100 percent, or not, or somewhere in the middle- 
Judith: 
6 
 
We really haven't done that yet; help you evaluate your thinking. We've just been 
identifying your thinking. But does it make sense to you that you might still be 
seeing the world through black glasses? 
Abe: 
Mostly. 
Judith: 
Yes. Not all your thoughts are 100 percent true. 
Abe: 
I think most of my thoughts are, but when I go out and do things, then I feel 
better when I'm doing them. 
Judith: 
That's terrific. 
Abe: 
I don't have as many black dots now. 
Judith: 
Yes. It sounds like this next part is true, then? "The way I'll feel better is by making 
small changes in my thinking and behavior every day"? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Excellent. We covered it just a little bit last session, so I want to talk about it more 
this session. "Give myself credit for doing things on the Action Plan, for doing 
anything else that helps me get over the depression, and for anything that's even 
a little bit difficult, but I do it anyway." Were you any better at giving yourself 
credit this week? 
Abe: 
7 
 
I think so. Last week, I hadn't really done that much that I really felt that I 
deserved any credit. But I tried to push myself this week and do the things we 
talked about, so yeah. I was better because I was able to recognize that. 
Judith: 
That's great. 
Abe: 
I was pushing myself and doing it. 
Judith: 
In a few minutes, maybe we'll talk about keeping a credit list, so we'll get to that, 
too. 
 
UPDATE (BEST PART OF THE WEEK) AND DRAWING CONCLUSIONS 
 
[In a traditional CBT therapy session, we generally ask, “What should I know 
about that happened since the last time I saw  you?” Clients who are depressed 
almost always report only negative situations. In Recovery-Oriented Cognitive 
Therapy, we ask about positive experiences and help clients draw positive 
conclusions about them.] 
 
Okay. So, again, what was the best part of this past week? Or, when did you feel 
the best? When were you at your best? 
Abe: 
Well, all of the things, just going out for a walk is better than sitting on the couch. 
But I went out with my grandson again, and that was good. 
Judith: 
Ethan again? 
Abe: 
Ethan. 
8 
 
Judith: 
What did you do with him? 
Abe: 
We just went out and got ice cream again. 
 
[Dr. Beck becomes conversational, trying to lighten the mood and show 
interest.] 
 
Judith: 
Vanilla? 
Abe: 
I tried a different flavor this time. 
Judith: 
Did you? What did you try? 
Abe: 
It was a chocolate swirl thing. It was different. 
Judith: 
Which do you like better? The vanilla the week before? 
Abe: 
I don't know. 
Judith: 
About the same. 
Abe: 
I like trying something new. 
Judith: 
9 
 
Good for you. So, you were at your best when you took Ethan for ice cream 
again? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck helps Abe draw positive conclusions about the experience.] 
Judith: 
What was good about taking him for ice cream? 
Abe: 
I think it's just fun to be with him and just talk about stuff, and to feel kind of like 
a normal person. 
Judith: 
Yeah. So, you felt less depressed when you were out with him? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah. That's good. Does that imply that actually you might be able to do things 
that can help you feel better? 
Abe: 
I guess so. 
 
[Dr. Beck asks a question so Abe will conclude that this difficult action had 
become easier.] 
Judith: 
Was it easy to go out with him, or was it still hard? 
Abe: 
It was easier than the first time. It was a lot easier than the first time. 
10 
 
Judith: 
Oh, good. I'm glad. 
Abe: 
I still have some questions, but it was a lot easier. 
 
REINFORCING THE COGNITIVE MODEL 
 
[Dr. Beck next seeks an explanation for why this action was easier, identifies an 
adaptive cognition that was different from what he had previously thought, and 
subtly reinforces the cognitive model.] 
 
Judith: 
If it was easier, it makes me think that your thinking must have been different. 
What were you thinking when you were getting ready to go out with him? 
Abe: 
I was thinking, "Well, last time went pretty good, so, no reason to think that this 
time won't be good too." So, I was just sort of more able to look forward to it as I 
was going to do it. 
Judith: 
That's terrific. This time you were making a positive prediction and your mood 
was better? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
And it made it easier to go out. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
11 
 
REVIEWING THERAPY NOTES: PART TWO 
[Dr. Beck checks on how often Abe read his therapy notes and reviews the notes 
from the previous session.] 
Judith:  
Okay. I want to just get back to the therapy notes from last week, too. Were you 
able to read these every day? 
Abe: 
I did, yeah. I read it every day. 
Judith: 
Were you able to pull them out any other times during the day? I'm not sure we 
even asked you to do that. 
Abe: 
After I got up in the morning and took a shower and stuff, I would read it. 
Judith: 
Right, right. Okay. So, tell me what you think of this [reading]: "When I criticize 
myself, remember, I'm only looking at part of the scene, and it's through black 
glasses. Judy says it's not my fault. It's happening because I have depression." 
Abe: 
I think that there's some truth to that. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes”]. Do you think you're accepting this fact more, that you do 
have a real illness? Last week, I think it was a hard thing to even think about. 
Abe: 
I think that was the first time that I really thought about it in that way. When you 
went down and read the list of things to me, 
 
[Dr. Beck had shown him the diagnostic criteria in the DSM.] 
12 
 
 
 I could say, "Yeah, that's me." 
Judith: 
That's you. 
Abe: 
So, I think that it's in a book, it must mean something. 
 
Judith: 
Yeah. Are you thinking now that your condition is more like pneumonia? 
 
[Dr. Beck had given him an analogy, helping him conclude that he would have 
had some of the same symptoms--low energy, low motivation, difficulty pushing 
himself—if he had pneumonia. But he wouldn’t have criticized himself for these 
symptoms. This psychoeducation helped him see that he had a very real 
condition, which, in turn, helped him to be less self-critical.] 
Abe: 
I guess so. 
Judith: 
Something that happens that has these really negative symptoms, makes 
everything harder? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Then we talked about, last week, about how your thinking influences how you 
feel and what you do. Were you able to catch any of those automatic thoughts 
this week? I don't think I even called them automatic. They're just your depressed 
thoughts. 
Abe: 
13 
 
Just my thoughts. Yeah. 
Judith: 
Did you catch any this week? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I guess the worst one was like when I said that sitting on the couch is hard, 
so when I was sitting there, there would be times when I would think that I'm not 
going to get better. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes”] When you had that thought, how did that make you feel? 
Abe: 
Bad. 
 
[Dr. Beck doesn’t ask him to specify what “bad” means because she wants to 
emphasize a different point.] 
Judith: 
Were you able to remind yourself at all that just because you think something, 
doesn't necessarily mean it's true? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I did. I can't say I believe that 100 percent, but I believe it more than I did in 
the beginning. 
Judith: 
Okay. That's good. 
Abe: 
Then, probably in my weaker moments, I said, "This isn't going to work." 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes”].  Meaning this therapy? 
Abe: 
14 
 
This therapy and all that. So, I went out and had ice cream with my grandson. 
[expressing additional automatic thoughts] Well, I ought to be doing that anyway. 
I went for a walk. Well, I ought to be doing that anyway.  
Judith: 
So, you got really self-critical? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Yeah. All right. I think I'll come back to the rest of the Action Plan in a few 
minutes. 
 
[Dr, Beck decides not to address the self-criticism directly at this point, but 
instead to teach Abe a technique to counteract self-criticism. His previous 
Action Plan had been to give himself credit. Now Dr. Beck will help him do this 
in an organized way that will help him focus more strongly on this task and 
remember what he has identified.] 
 
KEEPING A CREDIT LIST 
 
Judith: 
Let's talk about a credit list, [being collaborative] if that's all right? 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
It seems to me that you've lost a lot of confidence in yourself. 
 
[Dr. Beck summarizes his difficulties in a normalizing, non-pathological, way.] 
Abe: 
15 
 
Losing my job really hurt. 
Judith: 
Yes.  It seems to me you've lost confidence in a lot of ways. You've lost confidence 
about your ability to work. You're afraid that even if you got a job, you wouldn't 
do it very well. Seems like you've lost confidence in your ability to keep your 
apartment in order. Lost confidence in how other people might view you. It 
makes it harder to get together with friends. Do you think I'm right about this? 
Abe: 
Yeah. And we haven't even talked much about my ex-wife. About the fact that the 
marriage failed. That's pretty bad too. 
Judith: 
Well, it's not surprising that you've lost confidence in yourself [providing 
psychoeducation]  because that's what depression really does. It really makes you 
lose confidence. It would be really, really important for you to recognize that you 
are taking steps to take control of your life again. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck provides a rationale.] 
Judith: 
That's why I'd like you to keep a credit list, in writing, if you can. You could just 
keep it on any kind of piece of paper, or you could keep this credit list on a three-
by-five card that you keep in your pocket, or you could keep a list on your phone. 
Abe: 
This is just like my saying “Good job” to myself? 
Judith: 
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. This is when I want you to do it. We talked a little bit about 
this at the evaluation. 
 
16 
 
[Dr. Beck reminds Abe of the guideline for giving himself credit.] 
 
 Whenever you do anything that's even a little bit difficult, but you do it anyway, 
you deserve credit for that. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
Should I write that down on your Action Plan for you? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
[Dr. Beck writes the item on Abe’s Action Plan and returns to the analogy of 
pneumonia.] 
Now, if you had pneumonia, and yet you were able to get yourself out of bed, you 
were able to go to the supermarket, you were able to put in a load of laundry, 
would you think you deserve credit for it? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Only because, even though I think I'm supposed to do them, I haven't done 
them for a long time. 
Judith: 
That's exactly right. The depression has been so severe, it's been so hard for you 
to do these things. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
It sounds to me as if you've done some things this week that were even a little bit 
difficult, but you did them anyway. Is that right? 
17 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. Going for the walks, and I walked by the church one day, too. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's great. All right, so we can start your credit list right now. Should I give 
you a piece of paper? 
Abe: 
I can write it on here.  
 
Judith: 
Okay. So, you said this week you walked by the church? 
Abe: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’]. 
Judith: 
It was easier to take your grandson out for ice cream. Was it easy? 
Abe: 
Not easy, but easier. 
Judith: 
Okay, so if it was even a little bit difficult, then it goes on the list.  Took Ethan out 
for ice cream.  
 
[It’s a good idea to have clients practice writing the list in session by having 
them reflect on what they already did that day. Starting an Action Plan like this 
in the session makes it far more likely that the client will continue it at home.] 
 
What did you even do today that was a little bit difficult, but you did it anyway? 
Abe: 
18 
 
Well, yeah, I don't know that this was even on the list, but when I... After I got up 
and took my shower this morning, I straightened up a couple things in the 
apartment. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's great. Was that even a little bit difficult? 
Abe: 
It was really hard. 
Judith: 
Okay, so write that on your list. 
Abe: 
I didn't make a big dent in everything that needs to be done, I just moved them 
around a little bit. Kind of make it a clearer path to walk through. 
 
[Dr. Beck is careful not to get sidetracked by asking more about this topic at this 
point, especially since Abe had put it on the agenda and she knows they will get 
to it later.] 
Judith: 
Right. We have that on our agenda to talk more about today.  
But you did some things around the apartment, and we hadn't even talked about 
your doing that.  Was it good that you did that, or would it have been better if 
you hadn't done it? 
Abe: 
It was good I did it. 
Judith: 
It was good you did it, so it absolutely belongs on the list. How about getting out 
of bed? Was that easy today? 
Abe: 
19 
 
It was a lot easier. I wake up, and lots of times I just stay in bed. But what I've 
been trying to do is push myself to actually get out of bed when I wake up at 7:00 
a.m. 
Judith: 
I see, instead of lying in bed. 
Abe: 
So, I pushed myself and got up. 
Judith: 
All right. So, can you write down, "Got out of bed"?  
 
[Given what Abe said earlier in the session, Dr. Beck anticipates that he will 
have a similar automatic thought that could interfere with a recognition that he 
deserves credit for doing this. She normalizes a very common thought.] 
 
A lot of people say, "Well, why do I deserve credit for getting out of bed, it's just 
what I should do?" Is that something you were thinking? 
Abe: 
Oh, yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck uses self-disclosure to encourage Abe to give himself credit.] 
Judith: 
Okay. So, I have to tell you that every morning when I get out of bed, I give myself 
credit. Because I would much rather turn off the alarm and go back to sleep, but I 
don't. And I say, "Well, it's good you got up." And I'm not even depressed. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
20 
 
So, Abe, once you're over the depression, it will be your choice as to whether you 
give yourself credit for getting out of bed or not. But while it's still even a little bit 
difficult, it's really important. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck reinforces the rationale for keeping a credit list. Rather than 
telling him why, she asks him a question, prompting him to think about it.] 
Judith: 
Can you see how giving yourself credit for these things might help you build up 
your confidence, show you that you are able to do things that are difficult? 
Abe: 
I wasn't thinking about it that way, but I just kind of feel better thinking about it, 
that I'm doing those things. But I have to somehow remind myself that it has to 
do with building confidence, too. 
Judith: 
Yes, that's good. Should I write that on your Action Plan, too? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, [writing] "When I do anything that's even a little bit difficult, give myself 
credit," and how should I phrase it? “This will build my confidence”? 
Abe: 
This will build my confidence. 
Judith: 
[writing]  "This will build my confidence." Anything else you did today that was 
even a little bit difficult? 
Abe: 
21 
 
No. I thought about doing something, but I didn't do it. 
 
[Again, Dr. Beck is careful not to get side-tracked. She judges that sticking with 
the credit list is more important.] 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes’] How about coming to therapy today? Was that even a little 
bit difficult? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Yeah. 
Judith: 
Okay. That goes on your list too. So, "Came to therapy." So, we have a bunch of 
things that you did just even today, that you deserve credit for. Now, if you don't 
give yourself credit for those things, what happens? 
Abe: 
Then I just think about it the same way I always did, that I ought to be doing that 
stuff anyway. 
Judith: 
Yeah. So, you feel, what, guilty, you feel bad? 
Abe: 
Feel bad, guilty, lazy, incompetent. 
Judith: 
Right. Instead of, "Wow, these things are hard because I'm depressed." So, of 
course you deserve credit for doing them. Right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Do you think you could keep a list like this every day? 
22 
 
Abe: 
Yeah, I could. Maybe it would help if I would do this while I'm sitting on the couch 
at night. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's a great idea. 
Abe: 
Because that's when I have trouble. 
Judith: 
Yeah, okay. So, "Keep list. Do at night."  
 
[Dr. Beck anticipates a problem and normalizes it.] 
 
Now, the only problem with only doing it at night is that, if you're like most 
people, you're likely to forget 90 percent of what you actually did. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
I see you're wearing the rubber band. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Right. Did that work to have you ask yourself what was going through your mind? 
Abe: 
Yeah. That's how I realized that the evenings were difficult because I was, I was 
sitting there and having a hard time. Normally, I'd just go get a beer and not think 
about it. But because of this, I thought about it. 
Judith: 
23 
 
Terrific. 
Abe: 
Then I knew what the thoughts were. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers a solution to the problem.] 
Judith: 
I wonder if you could use the rubber band to remind you not only to look for your 
depressing thoughts, which might or might not be true, but to also ask yourself, 
"What have I done in the last hour, or two hours, or something like that, that I 
deserve credit for?" 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, using the rubber band as a reminder.  
 
ACTION PLAN REVIEW and DRAWING CONCLUSIONS 
 
[Dr. Beck has finished reviewing the therapy notes part of the Action Plan and 
set a new Action Plan to keep a credit list. Now, looking at her notes, she 
returns to the rest of the Action Plan and helps Abe draw positive conclusions 
about his experiences.] 
 
Judith: 
Okay, so back to what you got done this past week, were you able to take a look 
at the goal list? 
Abe: 
Yeah. Right here. 
Judith: 
24 
 
Do you have any changes on that? 
Abe: 
No. Visiting family is still really important. Still the idea about the job, like I really 
want one, but I'm still afraid I'll mess it up. 
 
[Again, Dr. Beck wants to stay on track. She notes a potential agenda item but 
then returns to reviewing the Action Plan. She recognizes that, if Abe is willing, 
they should probably postpone a detailed discussion of a job until he’s made 
more improvement.] 
Judith: 
Yes. So, if we have time, maybe we'll get back to that. [writing] “Mess up job.” 
Abe: 
This was one of the things I said I'd thought about, but I didn't do. I thought about 
calling up one of my friends, but I didn't. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes’] Well, I think we had agreed that that might be too hard for 
you. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, I don't think that was even part of your Action Plan. Let me just see what was. 
"Walking by the church." You said you did that. Did you visit the kids, other than 
taking Ethan for ice cream? 
Abe: 
Well, when I went to see Ethan, the other kids were there. So, I spent a few 
minutes playing with them. 
Judith: 
That's great. You were going to go out to the supermarket. Were you able to do 
that? 
25 
 
Abe: 
I did, yeah. It's just good to have some vegetables and stuff in the house instead 
of just eating everything out of a can. 
Judith: 
And you were supposed to try to get out of the house at least four times this 
week. Were you able to? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I did. If I get to count going out with Ethan as one of those times. 
Judith: 
Oh, sure. Was it even more than four? 
Abe: 
Well, I walked by the church one day. I did maybe five days. 
Judith: 
Oh, excellent. 
Abe: 
Five. 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck finds out how Abe wants to continue this Action Plan in the 
coming week.] 
Judith: 
So, what would you like to do this week in terms of getting out of the house? 
Abe: 
I'm afraid to set the bar too high, so, maybe five times. 
 
[Dr. Beck wants to make sure that Abe will be successful.] 
Judith: 
26 
 
Why don't we give you a range? How about four to six times? How does that 
sound? 
Abe: 
I should be able to do that. 
Judith: 
Should I write that on your Action Plan? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
[writing] "Get out of house four to six times." Okay.  
 
[Dr. Beck asks important questions to help Abe draw positive conclusions about 
his experience, then writes them down as part of Abe’s therapy notes that he 
will review daily in the coming week.] 
 
So, you were able to get out of the house. What was good about getting out of 
the house? What did it show you? 
Abe: 
Well, one, that I can do things that, up to this point, I just thought I couldn't do. 
Judith: 
Right. I'm writing that down. "I can do things I thought I couldn't do." 
Abe: 
When I do them, I feel good about it. 
Judith: 
Yeah. [writing] "When I do them, I feel good about them." So, does this imply that 
maybe you can start to take more control over your mood? 
Abe: 
27 
 
Maybe it does. 
 
[Noting some uncertainty, Dr. Beck asks Abe to put this concept in his own 
words.] 
Judith: 
So, what should I write down about that? 
Abe: 
Well, I think it's still more in the form of a question in my head. Does this mean 
that? 
Judith: 
How about a, “Maybe this means?” 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Is that about right? 
Abe: 
Yeah, maybe it means that. 
Judith: 
Maybe this means what? I can take more control? 
Abe: 
That there are things I can do to take control. 
Judith: 
Yes, exactly. [writing] "There are things I can do to take control." That's excellent. 
Okay. I want to talk just a little bit more about depressing thoughts. 
 
 
28 
 
 
PRIORITIZING THE AGENDA 
 
[Dr. Beck gives Abe the choice of how to spend the rest of the time in the 
session.] 
 
Then, maybe we can talk about getting your apartment in order, or would you 
rather talk about evenings? If we only have time to get to one of those, which 
would you like to get to? 
Abe: 
Evenings. 
Judith: 
Evenings, okay. 
Abe: 
Yeah. They're a problem. 
Judith: 
Yes. Okay, we'll do that.  
 
REINFORCING THE COGNITIVE MODEL 
 
Judith: 
So, you were able to catch some of these depressed thoughts this week, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, what do you think of this idea that the way that you feel, say, for example, as 
you're taking a walk, or as you're with Ethan, the way that you feel is going to 
depend, at least in great part, as to what's going through your mind? 
29 
 
Abe: 
I think there's truth to that. 
Judith: 
Yes. For example, when you thought, "I'll never get better," what effect did that 
have on your mood? 
Abe: 
It just made me depressed. Made me want to give up. 
 
[Dr. Beck recognizes that it’s likely Abe will have this automatic thought again, 
so she prepares him for it.] 
Judith: 
Exactly. If you have that thought again, "I'll never get better," how would you like 
to answer that thought? 
 
[Dr. Beck doesn’t need to use Socratic questioning, because Abe has already 
recognized there is evidence that he is starting to get better. But she doesn’t 
supply him with an answer, either. The response will be more powerful if Abe 
himself states it.] 
Abe: 
Well, I guess the first thing is, that's not a sure thing, that I'll never get better 
anymore. 
Judith: 
Right. That's excellent. [writing] “That's not a sure thing.” What makes you think 
that it might not be true? 
Abe: 
Because when I do stuff, I feel better. 
Judith: 
Exactly. So, you've really started to prove that to yourself, then. 
30 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So [writing], "I've started to prove this to myself." What was the other thought? 
“This isn't going to work?” 
Abe: 
This isn't going to work. That therapy isn't going to work. 
Judith: 
What would you like to remind yourself about that? 
Abe: 
Well, I don't want to jinx it, but it seems like, a little bit, it already is. 
Judith: 
So [writing], "It seems, a little bit, that it already is." That's good. All right. I got 
that on your Action Plan for you. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck provides additional psychoeducation.] 
Judith: 
Now, we call these kinds of thoughts, these thoughts that just seem to pop up 
into your mind, we call them automatic thoughts.  
 
[Dr. Beck recognizes that many people who are depressed criticize themselves 
for having negative automatic thoughts.] 
 
It's not your fault that you're having them. The reason that you're having these 
really negative automatic thoughts is because you're depressed. So, we've been 
talking about that. 
31 
 
Abe: 
Okay. Yeah. 
[Dr. Beck asks Abe about continuing an Action Plan.] 
Judith: 
So, this week, you're going to use the rubber band again to try to keep on 
identifying those thoughts? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
And to keep on reminding yourself that just because you think them, doesn't 
necessarily mean that it's true? And here I've written down answers to a couple of 
the automatic thoughts that you had this past week that you might have this 
coming week. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
[reading] If I think I'll never get better, remind myself that's not a sure thing. I've 
started to prove this to myself. And “This isn't going to work.” If I think that, 
remind myself it seems, a little bit, that it already is." Good. 
Abe: 
I think that might help. 
 
WORKING ON GOAL #1 [Part 1] 
[Dr Beck addresses Abe’s goal to make his evenings better in two parts. First, 
she asks if he could incorporate family into his evenings. She motivates him to 
work toward this goal by calling attention to his core value of family. They 
identify a step Abe wants to take in the coming week toward his goal. Dr. Beck 
conceptualizes an automatic thought that might be an obstacle and uses 
32 
 
[Socratic questioning to help Abe respond to it. Then they set a specific Action 
Plan and she writes it down for Abe.] 
 Judith: 
Now, before we get to evenings, you said earlier today that being with the family 
is really important to you.  
 
[At their first session, Abe had identified family as one of his core values. Dr. 
Beck also recognizes that Abe has become disconnected from almost everyone. 
And regaining a sense of connection is important for most individuals with 
depression. So, she weaves family into their discussion of how to make his 
evenings better. She starts by giving him a choice.] 
 
I wonder if there's something that you could do in the evenings? Either being with 
your family or talking to them on the phone? What would you like to be able to 
do?  
 
[The next question Dr. Beck asks is really key.] 
 
If you weren't depressed, what would you do? 
Abe: 
Well, I'd like to go over, but I don't want to invite myself. 
 
[Dr. Beck notes that Abe has probably had an automatic thought that leads him 
to feel reluctant to invite himself to their house. She recognizes that, if he’s 
willing, having face-to-face contact with them will strengthen his sense of 
connection much more than a phone call. After specifying whom Abe will call, 
she addresses the automatic thought.] 
 
But I could call them and talk to them on the phone. Oftentimes, when I call, they 
invite me over. 
Judith: 
33 
 
Okay. So, you're going to talk on the phone to whom? 
Abe: 
My son and my daughter. 
Judith: 
Great. 
Abe: 
I could give them a call. 
Judith: 
Uh-huh [nods “yes’]. So, do you have some thought that gets in the way of your 
saying, "Hey, is it convenient for me to come over?" 
Abe: 
I don't want to impose. 
Judith: 
So, the thought is, "If I invite myself, I'll be imposing on them." Is that right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
"I'll be imposing on them." 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
If we can take a moment here to try to figure out whether that thought is 100 
percent true, or zero percent true, or someplace in the middle. I don't know. It 
might be 100 percent true.  
 
34 
 
[Dr. Beck now starts the process of Socratic questioning to evaluate the 
thought.] 
 
But what makes you think that they'll see it as an imposition? 
 
[In other words, what evidence does Abe have?] 
Abe: 
I don't know if they will. I just think it. 
Judith: 
I see. 
Abe: 
I just think of myself that way. 
 
[Dr. Beck seeks evidence from the past] 
Judith: 
Before you got depressed, did you ever invite yourself over? 
Abe: 
Yeah. “Can I come over and spend some time with the kids?” Yeah.  
Judith: 
Did they seem to have a negative attitude about your doing that? 
Abe: 
No, not at all. They always seemed happy to have me come over. 
Judith: 
I see. Were there any times when you invited yourself over where they said, "Gee, 
today isn't a really good time"? 
Abe: 
35 
 
Instead of saying, "It's not a good time," they'd say something like, "Tomorrow 
would be better because we've got something scheduled today." 
Judith: 
Something scheduled. Right. So, if I could summarize what you just said, in the 
past, when you've invited yourself over, they've been glad to see you. And it 
sounds like they've been honest if it would be an imposition on them. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, have they changed in some way, do you think, that they wouldn't want you to 
come over now? 
Abe: 
No. I think it's just I've changed my thinking, the way I think about my... When I 
get into that spiral, I start thinking that stuff, and then, I guess, it's stuff I just 
make up. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers another perspective and ask Abe what he thinks.] 
Judith: 
I wonder if another way of looking at this is that maybe they would do exactly 
what they've done in the past, which is either to welcome you, or to reschedule? 
Do you think that's possible? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I think so. 
Judith: 
Yeah.  
 
[Dr. Beck de-catastrophizes the situation by having Abe think of how he could 
cope with the worst outcome and then what the best and most realistic 
outcomes probably are.] 
36 
 
 
And if the worst happens, and they say, "Gee, sorry, but we're really busy now," 
then how could you cope with that? 
Abe: 
I could call the other one. 
Judith: 
That's a great idea. Right. But that's only the worst that could happen. What's the 
best that could happen if you called one of them? 
Abe: 
They'd say, "Sure, we'd love to have you over. When would you like to come?" 
Judith: 
Yeah, that sounds pretty good. What do you think is the most realistic outcome? 
Abe: 
They'd probably say something like, "Yeah, that'd be great. We'd be happy to 
have you over. Thursday night would be a good time. Can you come over then?" 
Judith: 
So, the most realistic is that they'd be really glad that you called. 
Abe: 
I think so. 
Judith: 
And they'd set a date with you. 
Abe: 
They were always good, in the past, about those kinds of things. It's just since I 
started going downhill, it was more like me not calling them. Not them saying 
they didn't want to see me. 
 
37 
 
[Again, Dr. Beck asks Abe to take an active part in crafting a response instead of 
providing him with one.] 
Judith: 
Right. So, how do you want to answer this thought, "If I invite myself, I'll be 
imposing on them"? 
Abe: 
Well, in the past, they've always been happy to hear from me. 
Judith: 
Yeah. So [writing], "In the past, they were always happy to hear from me." That's 
good.  
 
[Dr. Beck asks Abe to set a specific Action Plan] 
 
Would you like to set yourself an Action Plan item about this? 
Abe: 
I should call one of them anyway, if not both. 
Judith: 
What do you think, one or both? 
Abe: 
How about one, with other one being optional? 
Judith: 
That sounds good. Okay, so are going to call your son or the daughter? Which 
one's going to be optional? 
Abe: 
My daughter will be optional. 
Judith: 
38 
 
Okay. So, do you think it might be a good idea for you to call them and try to go 
over one evening, since evenings are so tough for you? 
Abe: 
Yeah, that would be really good if I could do that. 
Judith: 
Yes. [writing] Then, optionally, you'd call the other one and see if you could go 
over one evening. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
WORKING ON GOAL #1 [Part 2] 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck and Abe continue to talk about the goal of making evenings 
better.] 
Judith: 
What else would you like to be able to do in the evenings? 
Abe: 
Well, the grandkids, they have different kinds of activities going on. I could go to 
something. I could go to a game, or a concert. This is sort of the end of the school 
year for them. They've got different kinds of things going on at school that I could 
go to. 
Judith: 
That sounds great. That's great. And on the evenings when you stay in your 
apartment, what would you like to be doing? 
Abe: 
Well, even if I could read the paper and concentrate on it, that would be an 
improvement. 
Judith: 
39 
 
Okay. So, another thing is you might read the newspaper. 
Abe: 
Like read the entire sports section. That would be an improvement. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
I used to like politics, but that's getting harder, so I don't know if I want to do that 
now. 
Judith: 
Okay.  
 
[Dr. Beck wants to make sure that Abe will be able to successfully complete the 
Action Plan. Up to this point, he has been able to read a short part of the sports 
section but not the whole thing.] 
 
I think we should make the entire sports section optional, but at least you'd read 
part of it. 
Abe: 
Part of it. 
Judith: 
Is that all right? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
[writes it down]  
 
 
40 
 
 
WORKING ON GOAL #2  
[Dr Beck addresses Abe’s second goal, to straighten up his apartment. First, she 
asks him what steps he’d like to take. She makes sure that the steps are small so 
he won’t be overwhelmed and checks on the likelihood of completion. She also 
emphasizes another core value Abe has: being in control.  Dr. Beck 
conceptualizes that an automatic thought might be an obstacle and uses 
Socratic questioning to help Abe respond to it. Then they set a specific Action 
Plan and she writes it down for Abe.] 
 
Judith: 
 You mentioned getting your apartment in better order. Is there something you'd 
like to do during the day, or the evening about that? 
Abe: 
I should probably clean up the kitchen. I'd just get the dirty stuff out of the sink 
and put it away. 
Judith: 
So, "Cleaning the kitchen." But not the whole kitchen, right? 
Abe: 
Yeah, not the whole kitchen. I would clean the sink. 
Judith: 
[writing] You said, “Just clean the sink.” Okay, that sounds good. 
Abe: 
Which would be, by itself, a big improvement. 
Judith: 
Yeah.  
 
41 
 
[Dr. Beck then asks the most important question to assess the likelihood that 
Abe will take this step.] 
 
So, how likely are you to clean the sink? 
Abe: 
Part of it, for sure. 
Judith: 
Do you want to maybe set a time limit on it? Like clean the sink for 10 minutes, 
and then you can stop? 
Abe: 
That would be good. 
Judith: 
Okay. 
Abe: 
That way I could do that and be okay with putting the 10 minutes in. 
Judith: 
Is there something else you'd like to do this week? Something that, around the 
apartment, that if you did it, you could say, "Okay, this shows I'm starting to take 
control. Starting to take control of the apartment," like doing some of the dishes.  
 
[Dr. Beck emphasizes the importance of Abe’s regaining a sense of control, 
another one of his core values.] 
What else would make a difference to you? 
Abe: 
Probably clean the bathroom. 
Judith: 
That sounds like a big job. 
42 
 
Abe: 
Well, maybe just the sink. 
Judith: 
Okay [writing] "Clean the bathroom sink." Is this enough, or should we give you 
one more thing to do? 
Abe: 
It's starting to sound like a lot. 
 
[Dr. Beck realizes Abe is starting to feel overwhelmed so she next reviews the 
Action Plan, offering to change it if Abe wants.] 
 
REVIEWING THE NEW ACTION PLAN 
[Dr. Beck reads through the entire Action Plan, which contains steps Abe has 
agreed to take toward both goals and also therapy notes, important things for 
him to remember.] 
Judith: 
All right. So, let me go through, if this is okay, the Action Plan that we have so far, 
and then let's cross some things off, or make some things easier. Okay? 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
All right. So, when you do anything that's even a little bit difficult, you're going to 
give yourself credit. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
And you're going to write it on a piece of paper. You've already started here. 
43 
 
Abe: 
I've got my rubber band as a reminder to do that. 
Judith: 
Yes. [writing] I'm going to put down rubber band. Right. And we wrote down that 
the reason to do this is that it will build your confidence. 
Abe: 
Yeah. Yeah. 
Judith: 
This is something you're going to do at night, but you're going to keep the rubber 
band, and at least try to keep track of these things during the day also. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Okay. "Get out of the house four to six times." How does that sound? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I can do that. 
Judith: 
Okay. How much do you agree with this idea? "I can do things I thought I couldn't 
do." How true do you think that is? 
Abe: 
Well, little things anyway, that's true. 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’] It's true. Good. 
Abe: 
I mean, I've already done that, a little bit. 
Judith: 
44 
 
So, I'm writing true next to that. "When I do them, I feel good about them." 
Abe: 
Yeah. I agree with that. 
Judith: 
That's true. "Maybe this means there are things I can do to take control." 
Abe: 
I believe that 50 percent. 
Judith: 
Okay. Maybe we'll come back to that if we have time. "If I think I'll never get 
better, remind myself that not getting better is not a sure thing. I've started to 
prove this to myself." 
Abe: 
I've started doing things, and when I do those things, I feel better. So, that's kind 
of proof that doing things could help. 
Judith: 
All right. And, "When you think this isn't going to work, remind myself it seems, a 
little bit, that it already is.”  Do you believe that? 
Abe: 
That's true. Yeah, because I do feel better. 
Judith: 
Now, could you read these therapy notes every morning? 
Abe: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’] 
Judith: 
You want to keep them by the coffee maker like the other ones? Could you read 
the other notes, too? The ones from last week, and the ones from the week 
before? 
45 
 
Abe: 
Yeah, I got those. 
Judith: 
Okay. So, I'll write that here. [writing] "Read all the therapy notes in the morning." 
I think they probably are all still relevant to you. I do think it would help to read 
them later on in the day. Would you be willing to try to do that? 
Abe: 
Yeah. I'm just trying to think when would be the time to do it. I've said I'd do a 
couple things in the evenings on the couch, and I'm afraid to overload the evening 
to have too many things on the list at the end of the day. 
Judith: 
How long do you think it will take you to read the notes? 
Abe: 
Five minutes. 
Judith: 
No, I don't think so. I think it will probably take a minute and a half. If we had 
time, I'd have you read them right now and we could time you. But that's fine. If 
you'd like to read it in the afternoon, that's fine. What would you think about 
setting a timer on your phone? That's what I do all the time. 
Abe: 
I think maybe when I eat my dinner. 
Judith: 
Great. All right. So, how are you going to remind yourself? Do you want a note in 
the kitchen? 
Abe: 
I'll just make this a multipurpose rubber band. 
Judith: 
46 
 
Okay. [writing] So when you notice the rubber band at dinner, you'll say, "Read 
the notes." Okay, so notice the rubber band to remind you. 
Abe: 
Okay. It helps me to write it down too. 
Judith: 
Good. I'm going to give you a copy of this, too. 
Abe: 
Thank you. 
Judith: 
So, then you'll have two copies. I want to make sure that these things don't sound 
overwhelming. "Talk on the phone to your son and daughter. To your son, and 
then talking to your daughter is optional." 
Abe: 
Yeah. I'll call him. I'll call him. 
Judith: 
And invite yourself over? 
Abe: 
Can we make that optional? 
Judith: 
Yes. Let's do that. 
Abe: 
I'll call him, but... 
Judith: 
[writing] "Inviting self over is optional." And I did put a note on here. "In the past, 
they were always happy to hear from me." 
Abe: 
47 
 
That's true. If you could just draw a line from that over to making the phone call. 
Judith: 
That's good. In the evenings, we talked about trying to go to a game, or a concert, 
something that your grandchildren are involved in. 
Abe: 
Or even during the day because they have things during the day at school. 
Judith: 
Oh, that's good. So, day or evening. 
Abe: 
Or things in the late afternoon. 
Judith: 
Do you want to keep that on, or you want to make that optional? 
Abe: 
I'd like to do that. 
Judith: 
Okay. "In the evening, read the newspaper. If you can, even the entire sports 
section." Want to keep that on? 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Okay. Then, I think these things were for the day, but I'm not sure. One was, 
"Clean the kitchen sink for 10 minutes." 
Abe: 
I think that was in the evening that I wanted to do that because that would give 
me something to do instead of just sitting on the couch. 
Judith: 
48 
 
Got it. So, how likely are you to do that one evening? 
Abe: 
One evening? 
Judith: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’]. For 10 minutes. 
Abe: 
I'll do that. 
Judith: 
And cleaning the bathroom sink? 
Abe: 
Less so. 
Judith: 
Optional? 
 
[It’s much better for the client’s confidence and sense of control to make an 
Action Plan easier or optional if it doesn’t look highly likely that the client will 
do it.] 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Okay. So, there's a lot on the sheet, but most of it is just reading things to 
yourself. So [reading from Action Plan notes], the stuff we actually have you doing 
is giving yourself credit, getting out of the house four to six times, reading your 
therapy notes, talking on the phone to your son, going to a game or to a concert 
or something with your grandchildren. 
Abe: 
Looking at some kind of school activity. 
49 
 
Judith: 
Okay. Reading the newspaper, at least once. And then cleaning the kitchen sink. 
How hard will it be to give yourself credit? 
Abe: 
I think I can do that. 
 
[Dr. Beck wants to reinforce the rationale for keeping a credit list, so she elicits 
it instead of providing it.] 
 
Judith: 
Remind me what the point is of giving yourself credit. 
Abe: 
Well, I recognize then that I'm doing something, even though I have depression. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
Abe: 
And that, by doing these things, it gives me a way to take control over that. 
Judith: 
Exactly. And then what happens to your confidence in yourself? 
Abe: 
Better. 
Judith: 
It gets better, right. So, you think you can give yourself credit? Do you think you 
can get out of the house four to six times? 
Abe: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’]., I can do that. 
 
50 
 
[Rather than telling Abe she thinks getting out of the house will be easier this 
week, Dr. Beck asks him a question so he can draw that conclusion himself.] 
Judith: 
Do you think it's going to be easier this week to get out of the house at least four 
times, or harder? 
Abe: 
Yeah, I liked doing that. 
 
[She asks additional questions to help him realize that other tasks won’t be too 
difficult.] 
Judith: 
Okay, so it sounds like that. Reading the therapy notes. How hard will that be? 
Abe: 
That won't be hard. 
Judith: 
Okay. Talking to your son on the phone. How hard will that be? 
Abe: 
After I call him, it'll be fine. He'll be happy to hear from me. It's just dialing the 
number that's going to be the hard part. 
Judith: 
Yeah. 
 
[Again, Dr. Beck elicits the rationale for doing something that is difficult.] 
 
So, is there something you want to remind yourself of? Why do something that's 
hard? Why call your son? 
Abe: 
Because they've always been happy to hear from me before. 
51 
 
Judith: 
Yeah. Any other reasons to call your son? 
Abe: 
Family. Connections. Just a bunch of stuff. 
 
[Dr. Beck offers an additional rationale.] 
Judith: 
Do you think your son might feel good if you called him? 
Abe: 
He'd probably be happy to hear from me. 
Judith: 
Yeah. So, it would help you, and it would probably make your son feel good. 
When you realize that, does it make it harder to do, or easier to do? 
Abe: 
Easier because I think they're worried about me, and if they hear from me, they'll 
feel better. 
Judith: 
Exactly. How hard will it be to read the newspaper? 
Abe: 
Well, that shouldn't be hard as long as I can concentrate on it. 
Judith: 
Right. Going to at least one event that your grandchildren are involved with. 
Abe: 
I can do that. I just know that towards the end of the school year, they do stuff. 
Judith: 
52 
 
Yeah. So, maybe we'll just put [writing], "If it works out." That's good. Cleaning 
the sink for 10 minutes. How hard is that going to be? 
Abe: 
I think making it for 10 minutes makes it easier. If I think I have to clean up the 
sink, that would be really hard. 
Judith: 
You can do 10 minutes? 
Abe: 
I can do that. 
Judith: 
That's good. Reading all your therapy notes, not just this week, but from last week 
and the week before. Do you think you can do that? 
Abe: 
I can do that over dinner.  
Judith: 
Great. Well, Abe, I think you've got a great Action Plan here. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Dr. Beck points out the progress he’s making.] 
Judith: 
Even if you could only do half of it, it would be so much better than you were 
doing three weeks ago, wouldn't it? 
Abe: 
It's a lot more. 
Judith: 
53 
 
Yeah. I think if you're able to not only do it, but give yourself credit, my guess is 
you're pretty soon going to really notice small changes in your mood. 
Abe: 
I notice the change in my mood when I'm doing stuff. 
Judith: 
Yeah. That's great that you can see that. 
 
ELICITING FEEDBACK AT END OF SESSION 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck elicits feedback and takes the opportunity to provide additional 
psychoeducation and a behavioral guideline linked to Abe’s values.] 
 
Judith: 
So, what did you think of today's session? 
Abe: 
It's good. I start thinking, "Well, maybe this will work," because these are all 
things that I want to do. 
Judith: 
Yeah.  
 
[Dr. Beck reinforces the metaphor that explains why Abe has been having so 
many negative automatic thoughts.] 
 
But it's been really hard because of those black glasses, I think. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
Don't you think that those thoughts have really gotten in the way? 
54 
 
Abe: 
Yeah. I want to do them. And I think that if I do them, I think that things will go 
better. 
Judith: 
I think so, too.  
 
[Abe is feeling better but Dr. Beck wants to let him know that his mood will 
vary, so he won’t get overly discouraged when it does and so she can make a 
recommendation of what to do.] 
 
Now, of course, you're going to have your ups and downs this week. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
Judith: 
So, there are probably going to be times when you're more depressed. But when 
you are feeling more depressed, the best thing to do is just to get up off the 
couch. Anything that you do, other than sitting on the couch thinking depressing 
thoughts, is better than that. Anything that you do. 
Abe: 
Yeah. 
 
[Next, Dr. Beck provides additional psychoeducation, linking the guideline to 
Abe’s value of being in control.] 
Judith: 
The whole thing with depression is depression saps motivation. It makes you just 
want to sit on the couch. What's really important is not to do what you feel like 
doing when you're depressed, because all you feel like doing is sitting on the 
couch. What's really important to do is the things that will help you take better 
control. So, not what you feel like doing, but the things that will help you feel 
more in control. Should I write that down too? 
55 
 
Abe: 
You can. I've got it, but you can, yeah. 
Judith: 
You got it. Yeah, well, I'll put it here so I'll know it for my notes too. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
So, (writing) "Not what you feel like doing, but what will help you feel in control." 
That's good. Was there anything I said today that bothered you, or you thought I 
got wrong? 
Abe: 
No. No. It was real helpful. 
Judith: 
And how about when you come in next time, anything you want to do differently? 
Abe: 
No. I think that if we just keep doing this, I'm hoping it will work. 
 
[Dr. Beck boosts Abe’s confidence by expressing her genuine agreement.] 
Judith: 
I think it's going to work. I really do. See you next time. 
Abe: 
Okay. 
Judith: 
Next week, same time. 
Abe: 
Mm-hmm [nods “yes’]. 
56 
 
Judith: 
Great. 
Abe: 
Okay. Thanks. 
Transcripts of Carl Rogers' Therapy Sessions
Edited by Barbara T. Brodley and Germain Lietaer
Volume 12
Year
Page
Gloria Filmed Interview
1965
2
     
Sylvia 4th Interview (Filmed)
1975
21
   Commentary interspersed throughout
Sylvia 5th Interview (Filmed)
1975
39
   Commentary interspersed throughout
Kathy Filmed Interview
1975
53
  Commentary
67
Dione 1st Filmed Interview
1977
68
  Commentary interspersed throughout 
Dione 2nd Filmed Interview
1977
1977
85
  Final Comments
109
These transcripts are available for purposes of research, study and teaching. They 
may not be sold. 
Throughout these interviews the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the 
client (C) are numbered for easy reference
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 1
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may 
not be sold. 
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the 
client (C) are numbered for easy reference. 
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy (Part I)[Film]. Orange, 
CA: Psychological Films.]
     
GLORIA
DR. CARL ROGERS PART I -- DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM
[Before the Interview]
"From my own years of therapeutic experience, I have come to feel that if I can 
create the proper climate, the proper, relationship, the proper conditions, a process of 
therapeutic movement will almost inevitably occur in my client. You may ask, 'What is 
this climate? What are these conditions? Will they exist in the interview with the woman 
I am about to talk with, whom I have never seen before?' Let me try to describe very 
briefly what these conditions are as I see them.
First of all, one question is, can I be real in the relationship? This has come to 
have an increasing amount of importance to me over the years. I feel that genuineness is 
another way of describing the quality I would like to have. I like the term 'congruent', by 
which. I mean that what I am experiencing inside is present in my awareness and comes 
out through my communication. In a sense, when I have this quality, I am all in one piece 
in the relationship. There is another word that describes it for me. I feel that in the 
relationship, I would like to have a 'transparency.' I would be quite willing for my client 
to see all the way through me, that there would be nothing hidden. And when lam real in 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 2
this fashion that I'm trying to describe, then know that my own feelings will often bubble 
up into awareness and be expressed, but be expressed in ways that won't impose 
themselves on my client.
Then the second question I would have is, will I find myself prizing this person, 
caring for this person? I certainly don't want to pretend a if I dislike my client 
persistently, I feel it is better, that I should express it. But I know that the process of 
therapy is much more likely to occur and constructive change is much more likely, if I 
feel a real spontaneous prizing of this individual with whom I'm working, a prizing of 
this person as a separate individual. You can call that quality acceptance, you can call it 
caring, you can call it a non-possessive love if you wish. I think any of those terms tend 
to describe it. I know that the relationship will prove more constructive if it's present.
Then the third quality, will I be able to understand the inner world of this 
individual from the inside? Will I be able to see it through her eyes? Will I be able to be 
sufficiently sensitive to move around inside the world of her feelings so that I know what 
it feels like to be her so that I can sense not only the surface meanings, but some of the 
meanings that lie somewhat underneath the surface. I know that if I can let myself 
sensitively and accurately enter into her world of experience, then change and therapeutic 
movement are much more likely.
Well, suppose I am fortunate and that I do experience some of these attitudes in 
the relationship, what then? Well, then a variety of things are likely to happen. Both from 
my clinical experience and from our research investigations we find that if attitudes of the 
sorts that I have described are present, then quite a number of things will happen. She'll 
explore some of her feelings and attitudes more deeply. She is likely to discover some 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 3
hidden aspects of herself that she wasn't aware of previously. Feeling herself prized by 
me, it is quite possible she'll come to prize herself more. Feeling that some of her 
meanings are understood by me, then she can more readily perhaps listen to herself, listen 
to what is going on within her own experience, listen to some of the meanings she hasn't 
been able to catch before. And perhaps if she senses realness in me, she'll be able to be a 
little more real within herself. I suspect there will be a change in the manner of her 
expression, at least this has been my experience in other instances. From being rather 
remote from her experiencing, remote from
what is going on within her, it's possible that she'll move toward more immediacy of 
experiencing, that she will be able to sense and explore what is going on in her in the 
immediate moment. From being disapproving of herself, it is quite possible she'll move 
toward a greater degree of acceptance of herself. From somewhat of a fear of relating, she 
may move toward being able to relate more directly and to encounter me more directly. 
From construing life in somewhat rigid black and white patterns,' she may move toward 
more tentative ways of construing her experience and of seeing meanings in it. From a 
locus of evaluation which is outside of herself, it is quite possible she will move toward 
recognizing a greater capacity within herself for making judgments and drawing 
conclusions. So those are some of the changes that we have tended to find and I think that 
they are all of them changes that are characteristic of the process of therapy or of 
therapeutic movement. If I have any success in creating the kind of conditions that I 
described initially, then we may be able to see some of these changes in this client even 
though I know in advance that our contact is going to be very brief.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 4
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may 
not be sold. 
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the 
client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Note:  Gestures were transcribed by Barbara T. Brodley.
GLORIA
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy [Film]. Orange, CA: 
Psychological Films.]
THERAPIST: DR. CARL  ROGERS
T1
(Rogers stands as Gloria enters.) Good morning. (C: Hello, Dr. Rogers)  I'm Dr. 
Rogers, you must be Gloria. (They shake hands and sit down.)
C2
Yes, I am.
T2
Won't you have a chair?  Now then, we have half an hour together, and I really don't 
know what we will be able to make of it but uh I hope we can make something of it. 
I'd be glad to know whatever concerns you. (T: Sitting forward, C: Sitting back, legs 
crossed, right arm over the back of the chair)
C3
Well, right now I'm nervous (T: Mhm)  but I feel more comfortable the way you are 
talking in a low voice and I don't feel like you'll be so harsh on me.  But, ah ...
T3
I hear the tremor in your voice so I know you are...  (C: Smiles)
C4
Uh, well, the main thing I um, want to talk to you about is uh, I'm just newly 
divorced and uh I had gone in therapy before and I felt comfortable when I left, and 
all of a sudden now the biggest change is adjusting to my single life.  (T: Mhm, 
mhm) And uh one of the things that bothers me the most is especially men, and 
having men to the house and how it affects the children (T: Mhm, Mhm) and-   Uh, 
the biggest thing I want - the thing that keeps coming to my mind I want to tell you 
about is that I have a daughter, nine, who at one time I felt had a lot of emotional 
problems.  I wish I could stop shaking (T and C: laugh).  And uh, I'm real conscious 
of things affecting her. I don't want her to get upset, I don't want to shock her.  I want 
so bad to-  for her to accept me.  And we're real open with each other especially 
about sex.  And the other day she saw a girl that was single but pregnant and she 
asked me all about "can girls get pregnant if they are single?"  And the conversation 
was fine and I wasn’t un- at ease at all with her until she asked me if I had ever made 
love to a man since I left her daddy and I lied to her.  And ever since that, it keeps 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 5
coming up to my mind because I feel so guilty lying to her because I never lie and I 
want her to trust me.  And I want- I almost want an answer from you.  I want you to 
tell me if it would affect her wrong if I told her the truth, or what. (T:Mhm)
T4
And it's this concern about her and the fact that you really aren't - that this open 
relationship that has existed between you, now you feel it's kind of vanished?  
C5
Yes.  I feel like I have to be on guard about that (T: Mhm) because I remember when 
I was a little girl, when I first found out my mother and father made love, that was 
dirty and terrible, and I didn't- I didn’t like her any more for awhile.  And I don't 
want to lie to Pammy either and I don't know...
T5
I sure wish I could give you the answer as to what you should tell her.  (Smiles.)
C6
I was afraid you were going to say that  (Laughs).
T6
Because what you really want is an answer. 
C7
I want to especially know if it would affect her if I was completely honest and open 
with her or if it would affect her because I lied.  I feel like it is bound to make a 
strain because I lied to her. [Words lost]
T7
Mhm. You feel she'll suspect that, or she'll know something is not quite right?  
C8
I feel that in time she will distrust me, yes (T: Mhm, mhm).  And also I thought well, 
gee, what about when she gets a little older and she finds herself in touchy situations. 
She probably wouldn't want to admit it to me because she thinks I'm so good and so 
sweet.  (Points to herself.) And yet I'm afraid she could think I'm really a- a devil. 
And I want so bad for her to accept  me.   And I don't know  how  much  a 
nine-year-old can take.
T8
And really both alternatives concern you.  That she may think you're too good or 
better than you really are.  
C9
Yes.
T9
And she may think you are worse than you are.  
C10
Not worse than I am.  (Smiles) I don't know if she can accept me the way I am.  I 
think I paint a picture that I'm all sweet and motherly. And -- I'm a little ashamed of 
my shady side too. (T:Mhm, mhm)
T10
I see.  It really cuts a little deeper.  If she really knew you, would she, could she 
accept you?  
C11
This is what I don't know.  Yeah. I don't want her to turn away from me. (T: That 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 6
relationship-) And I don't even know how I feel about it because there are times 
when I feel so guilty like when I have a man over, I even try to make a special set-up 
so that if I were ever alone with him, the children would never catch me in that sort 
of thing.  Because I'm real leery about it (T: Mhm).  And yet I also know that I have 
these desires.
T11
And so it’s quite clear it isn't only her problem or the relationship with her, it's in you 
as well.  
C12
And my guilt. Yeah. Yeah. (T: Oh)  I feel guilty so often. (Moistens lips.)
T12
"What- What can I accept myself as doing?"  And uh (C: Yes, Yes) you realize that 
you set up sort of subterfuges, so as to make sure that you're not caught or 
something, you realize that you are acting from guilt, is that it?  
C13
Yes  (T: Mhm, mhm) and I don't like the ...  I would like to feel comfortable with 
whatever I do.  If I choose not to tell Pammy the truth, to feel comfortable that she 
can handle it, (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) and I don't.  I want to be honest, and yet I feel 
there are some areas that I don't even accept (T: Mhm, Mhm) .
T13
And if you can't accept them in yourself, how could you possibly be comfortable in 
telling them to her?  
C14
Right.
T14
Mhm. Mhm. And yet, as you say, you do have these desires and you do have your 
feelings, but- but you don't feel good about them. 
C15
Right.  (T: Nods and smiles.) (Pause) And I, I, I have a feeling that you are just 
going to sit there and let me stew in it (laughs) and I- I want more.  I want you to 
help me get rid of my guilt feeling.  If I can get rid of my guilt feeling about lying or 
going to bed with a single man, any of that, just so I can feel more comfortable.
T15
Mhm. And I guess I'd like to say, "No, I don't want to let you stew in your feelings," 
but on the other hand, I, I also feel that this is the kind of very private thing that I 
couldn't possibly answer for you.  But I sure as anything will try to help you work 
toward your own answer.  I don't know whether that makes any sense to you, but I 
mean it.  
C16
Well, I appreciate you saying that.  (Takes her arm off back of chair, now uses both 
hands to gesture.) You sound like you mean it.  But I don't know where to go.  (T: 
Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't begin to know where to go.  I thought that I had pretty 
well worked over most of my guilt, and now that this is coming up I'm disappointed 
in myself. (T: Mhm, Mhm) I really am. I want- I like it when I feel that no matter 
what I do, even if it's against my own morals or my upbringing, that I can still feel 
good about me.  And now I don't.  Like uh, there's a girl at work who sort of mothers 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 7
me and she just- she- I think she thinks I'm all sweet, and I sure don't want to show 
my more ornery devilish side with her.  I want to be sweet and it's so hard for me to - 
this all seems so new again (T: Mhm) and it's so disappointing.
T16
Yeah, I get the disappointment - that here, a lot of these things you’d thought you'd 
worked through, and now the guilts and the feeling that only a part of you is 
acceptable to anybody else.  
C17
Yes.
T17
That keeps coming out. (Pause)  (C: Strains eyebrows.) I guess I do catch the real 
deep puzzlement that you feel as to "What the hell shall I do? What can I do?"  
C18
Yes, and do you know what I can find, doctor,  (Touches forehead.) is that 
everything I start to do that I st- impulsive, seems natural to tell Pammy, or- or to go 
out on a date or something, I’m comfortable until I think how I was affected as a 
child and the minute that comes up, then I'm all haywire. (T: Mhm)  Like uh, I want 
to be a good mother so bad, and I feel like I am a good mother, (T: Mhm) but then 
there's those little exceptions.  Like my guilts with working.  I want to work and it's 
so fun having extra money.  I like to work nights.  The minute I think I'm not being 
real good to the children or giving them enough time, then I start feeling guilty 
again.  Then, that’s when I- it’s uh- what do they call it? (Looks away briefly.) A 
double bind.  That's just what it feels like. I want to do this and it feels right, but after 
all I'm not being a good mother and I want to be both.  I am becoming more and 
more aware of what a perfectionist I am.  That is what it seems I want to be so 
perfect.  Either I want to become perfect in my standards, or not have that need any 
more.
T18
Or, I guess I hear it a little differently - that uh- what you want is to seem perfect, but 
it means it’s- a great- a matter of great importance to you to be a good mother and 
you want to seem to be a good mother, even if some of your actual feelings differ 
from that. (Points to C.) Is that catching it or not?  
C19
Gee, I don't feel like I am saying that.  (T: Oh, okay) No, that isn't what I feel, really. 
I want to approve of me always, but my actions won't let me.  I want to approve of 
me. (Pause) I – I think-  (Strains face.)
T19
I realize ...  you -- alright, but let me -- I’d like to understand it. You sound as though 
your actions were kind of outside of you. You want to approve of you, but what you 
do somehow won't let you approve of yourself.  
C20
Right. (Pause) Like I feel that I can't approve of myself regarding, for example 
(Smiles.), my sex life.  (T: Mhm, Mhm) This is the big thing.  If I really fell in love 
with a man and I respected him and I adored him, I don't think I would feel so guilty 
going to bed with him and I don't think I would have to make up any excuses to the 
children because they could see my natural caring for him.  (T: Mhm, Okay) But 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 8
when I have the physical desires and I'll say, "Oh well, why not," and I want to 
anyway, but I feel guilty afterwards.  I hate facing the kids, I don't like looking at 
myself, and I rarely enjoy it.  And this is what I mean.  If the circumstances would 
be different, I don't think I'd feel so guilty because I'd feel right about it. (Gestures 
more profoundly.)
T20
Yeah, I- I guess I hear you saying, "If what I was doing, when I went to bed with a 
man, was really genuine and full of love and respect and so on, I wouldn't feel guilty 
in relation to Pam.  I wouldn’t uh, I, I really would be comfortable about the 
situation."  
C21
That's how I feel, yeah. (Smiles.) And I know that sounds like I want a perfect 
situation, but that is how I feel. And in the meantime, I can't stop these desires.  I 
tried that also.  I’ve tried saying, "O.K., I don't like myself when I do that so I won't 
do it any more."  But then I resent the children.  I think, why should they stop me 
from doing what I want, and it is really not that bad.
T21
But I guess I heard you saying too, that it isn't only the children, but you don't like it 
as well when it isn't really ...  
C22
Right.  I'm sure that - I know that's it, probably even more so than I'm aware of.  But 
I only notice it so much when I pick it up in the children.  Then I can also notice it in 
myself. (Touches her face.)
T22
And somehow, sometimes, you kind of uh, feel like blaming them for the feelings 
you have.  I mean, why should they cut you out from a normal sex life, huh? 
C23
Well, a sex life, I could say, not normal because there is something about me that 
says that's not very healthy – to uh just go into sex because you feel physically 
attracted or something, or a physical need.  So, something about it tells me that that's 
not quite right anyway. (Still touching her face.)
T23
Mhm. (Pause) But you feel, really, that at times you’re acting in ways that are not in 
accord with your own inner standards.  
C24
Right.  Right.
T24
But then you were also saying, a minute ago, that you feel you can't help that uh- 
either.  
C25
I wish I could.  That's it, and I can't - now I feel like I- I can't control myself as 
well as I could have before.  For a specific reason now, I can't.  I just let go and I 
have- there’s too many things I do wrong that I have to feel guilty for, and I sure 
don't like that.  I want you very much to give me a direct answer, and I'm going to 
ask it, and I don't expect a direct answer, (Smiles.) but I want to know.  Do you 
feel that - to me the most important thing is to be open and honest and if I can be 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 9
open and honest with my children, do you feel that it could harm them?  If for 
example, I could say to Pammy, "I was- I felt bad lying to you, Pammy, and I 
want to tell you the truth now," and if I tell her the truth and she’s shocked at me 
and she’s upset, that that could bother her more?  I was- I want to get rid of my 
guilts and that will help me, but I don't want to put ‘em on her. (Points away from 
herself.)
T25
That's right.
C26
Do you feel that that could hurt her?
T26
That’s a real concern. I guess uh - I am sure this will sound evasive to you, but it 
seems to me that perhaps the person you are not being uh fully honest with is you? 
(C: Sure) Because I was very much struck by the fact that you were saying, "If I feel 
all right about what I have done, whether it's going to bed with a man or what, if I 
really feel all right about it, then I do not have any concern about what I would tell 
Pam or my relationship with her."  (Shakes head.)
C27
Right.  All right.  Now I hear what you are sayin’. (Sighs) (Shifts back and forth in 
chair.) Then all right, then I want to work on (T: It’s kind of tough, huh?) -- I wanna 
work on accepting me, then.  I want to work on feeling all right about it.  But that 
makes sense.  That that will come natural and then I won't have to worry about 
Pammy. (T: Mhm.)  But when things do seem so wrong for me and I have an 
impulse to do them, how can I accept that?
T27
What you'd like to do is to feel more accepting toward yourself when you do things 
that you feel are wrong.  Is that right?  
C28
Right. And I feel like, I feel like… 
T28
(Smiling) It sounds like a tough assignment.  
C29
Yeah, I feel like you are going to say, "Now why do you think they’re wrong?" and 
uh, I have mixed feelings there too. (T: Mhm) Through therapy I will say, "Now 
look, I know this is natural.  Women feel it - sure, we don't talk about it lots socially 
but all women feel it and it's very natural."  I have had sex for the last 11 years and 
I’m- of course going to want it, but I still think it is wrong unless you’re really, truly 
in love with a man, and my body doesn't seem to agree.  And so I don't know how to 
accept it.
T29
It sounds like a triangle to me, isn't it? You feel that I, or therapists in general, or 
other people say, "It is all right, it is all right, it’s natural enough, go ahead." Um, and 
I guess you feel your body sort of lines up on that side of the picture.  (Points to C. ) 
But something in you says, "But I don't like it that way, not unless it’s really right."  
C30
Right.  (Long Pause) (Sighs, then speaks in a slower, somber way.) Well, I have a 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 10
hopeless feeling.  (T: Mhm) I mean, these are all the things that I sort of feel myself, 
and I feel uh - O.K., now what?
T30
Mhm. You feel this is the conflict and it's just insoluble, and therefore it is hopeless, 
and here you look to me and I don't seem to give you any help and that uh- 
C31
Right.  I uh- I really know you can't answer for me, and I have to figure it out 
myself, but I want you to guide me or show me where to start or - so it won't look so 
hopeless.  I know I can keep living with this conflict and I know eventually things 
would work out, but I'd like feeling more comfortable with the way I live – (T: 
Mhm, mhm.) and I'm not.
T31
One thing I might ask, what is it you wish I would say to you?  
C32
I wish you would say to me (Smiles): to be honest and take the risk that Pammy’s 
going to accept me.  And I also have a feeling if I could really risk it with Pammy, of 
all people, that I'd be able to say, "Here's this little kid that can accept me, and I'm 
really not that bad."  If she really knows what a demon I am and still loves me and 
accepts me, it seems like it would help me to accept me more - like it's really not that 
bad. (T: Mhm)  I want you to say to go ahead and be honest, but I don't want the 
responsibility that it would upset her. (T: I see.) That is where I don't want to take 
responsibility.
T32
So you know, yeah - You know very well what you'd like to do in the relationship. 
You would like to be yourself and you'd like to have her know that you're not perfect 
and do things that maybe even she wouldn't approve of, and that you disapprove of 
to some degree yourself, but that uh- somehow she would love you and accept you 
as an imperfect person.  
C33
Yes.  Like I wonder if my mother had been more open with me, maybe I wouldn't 
have had such a narrow attitude about sex.  If I would have thought that she could 
be, you know, pretty sexy and ornery, and devilish too, that I wouldn't look at her as 
being such a sweet mother, that she could also be the other side.  But she didn't talk 
about that. (Shakes her head.)  (T: Mhm) Maybe that's where I got my picture.  I 
don't know, but I want Pammy to see me as a full woman, but also accept me.
T33
You don't sound so uncertain.  
C34
I don't?  (Tilts head and smiles.) What do you mean?
T34
What I mean is you have been sitting there telling me just what you would like to do 
in that relationship with Pam.  
C35
(Appears confused.) I would, but I don't want to quite take the risk of doing it (T: I 
can understand) unless an authority tells me that …
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 11
T35
(Eyes moistening, hands clasped.)  It’s, I guess one thing that I feel very keenly is 
that it's an awful risky thing to live.  (Pause)  (Hands unclasp.) You'd be taking a 
chance on your relationship with her and taking a chance on letting her know who 
you are, really.  
C36
(Pause) Yeah.  But then if I don't take the chance, if I feel loved and accepted by her, 
I'll never feel good about it anyway.
T36
Mhm. Mhm. If her love and acceptance of you is based on a false picture of you, 
what the hell is the good of that?  Is that- is that what you are saying?  
C37
Yeah, that’s what I mean, yes. But I also feel there is a lot of responsibility with 
being a mother.  With I don’t- I don't want to feel like I have caused any big traumas 
in the children.  I don't like all that responsibility.  I think that's it.  I don't like it, 
feeling it could be my fault.
T37
Mhm. I guess that's what I meant when I said, "Life is risky."  It’s uh- to take the 
responsibility for being the person you would like to be with her is a hell of a 
responsibility.  
C38
It is.
T38
A very frightening one.  
C39
And you know, I- I look at it two ways.  I like to see myself as being so honest with 
the kids, and really being proud of myself so that no matter what I told them or no 
matter how bad they think I was, I was honest (points at herself) (T: Mhm) and 
down deep it’s gonna be a much more wholesome relationship, and yet you know, I 
get jealous of like when they are with their daddy.  I feel he’s more flip, he’s not 
quite as real, he’s not quite as honest, but nevertheless, they see a sweet picture of 
their dad.  You know, he is all goodness and light, and I am envious of that too.  I 
want them to see me just as sweet as they see him and yet I know he is not quite as 
real with them.  So it seems like I've got to swap the one for the other, and I know 
this is really what I want the most, but uh, I miss some of that glory.
T39
Yeah. You sort of feel, “I want them to have just as nice a picture of me as they have 
of their dad, (C: I do. Right) and if his is a little phony, then maybe mine will have to 
be too.”  I think that's putting it a little too strongly, but-   
C40
But that’s close.  That is what I mean.  So uh- But I know she can't have that neat a 
picture of me, if I were honest. (Big smile)  (T: Laughs)  Besides that, I do feel that 
I’m a little more ornery than their dad anyway.   So I'm likely to do more things that 
they’d disapprove of.
T40
Sounds like you really find it quite hard to believe that they would really love you if 
they knew you?  
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 12
C41
That's right.  You know that's exactly it.  Before therapy, I would have definitely 
chosen the other area.  I’m going to get respect from them no matter what - even if I 
have to lie.
T41
I see.
C42
But right now, I know that's not true (T: Mhm, mhm) and I'm not positive they'll 
truly accept me.  Something tells me they will.  I know they will, but I am not 
positive.  I want reassurance.  I keep wanting these things.
T42
And now you are kind of in a no-man's-land of probably shifting from one point of 
view toward them to another, but boy you'd sure like somebody to say, "That's right, 
you go ahead and do it."  (Gestures to sides.)
C43
Yes. Yes.  That's why I get encouraged when I read in a book from somebody I 
respect and admire, that this is the right thing no matter what - honesty will win out. 
Well then, that keeps giving me confidence. “By gosh, I'm right.”  But I ...
T43
It is so damned hard to really choose something on your own, isn't it?  
C44
Which makes me feel rea- very immature.  I don't like this in me.  I wish I were 
grown up enough or mature enough to make my decisions and stick by them, but I 
need somebody to help me on - somebody to push me.
T44
So that you kind of reproach yourself for that,  I guess. And feel, "Why, if I was 
anybody, or if I was grown up, I'd be mature enough to decide things like this for 
myself."  
C45
Right. Right.  And take more risks.  I wish I’d take more risks.  I wish that I could 
just go ahead and be this and say, however the children grow up, I've done my best. 
I didn’t have to constantly have this conflict.  And I'd like, in later years, to say, "No 
matter what you asked me kids, at least I told you the truth.  You may not have liked 
it, but it's been the truth."  (Camera pans towards hands.) That, somehow, I can 
admire.  (T: Mhm.) I- I disrespect people that lie.  I hate it so, you see what a double 
bind I am in.  I hate myself if I'm bad, but I also hate myself if I lie.  So uh, it's 
accepting.  I want to become more accepting. 
T45
I guess, judging from your tone of voice, you sound as though you hate yourself 
more when you lie than you do in terms of things you disapprove of in behavior. 
C46
I do.  I do because this has really bothered me.  This happened with Pammy about a 
month ago and it keeps coming to my mind.  I don't know whether to go back and 
talk to her about it or wait.  She may have even forgotten what she asked me, but uh 
– it just-
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 13
T46
The point is, you haven't forgotten.  
C47
I haven...  No, I haven't. And I would like, at least, to be able to tell her that I 
remember lying and I am sorry I lied and it has been driving me bugs because I did. 
(Pause)  I do- Now I feel like - now that's solved - and I didn't even solve a thing, but 
I feel relieved.  (T: Mhm, Mhm.) I uh- I do feel like you have been saying to me – 
you’re not say- giving me advice, but I do feel like you are saying, "You really 
wanna- You know what pattern you want to follow Gloria, and go ahead and follow 
it."  I sort of feel a backing up from you.
T47
I guess the way I sense it is uh, you've been telling me that you know what you want 
to do and yes, I do believe in backing up people in what they want to do.  It’s just a 
little different slant than the way it seems to you.  
C48
Are you telling me...
T48
You see, one thing that concerns me is uh,.. It's no damn good you’re doing 
something that you haven't really chosen to do.  That’s why I am trying to help you 
find out what your own inner choices are. 
C49
But then there's also a conflict there because I am not really positive what I wanna 
do.  The lying part, yes, but I am not positive what I wanna do when I go against 
myself. (T: Sure)  Like when I bring a man to the house.  I am not sure I want to do 
that.  If I feel guilty afterward, I must not have really wanted to.
T49
And I am interested that you say - I'm not just sure which words you used - but you 
don’t want- you don’t like yourself or don't approve of it when you do something 
against yourself.  (C: Hand to her face.)
C50
Yes. You know, this is so different.  Now this kind of thing we are talking about 
now, it isn't just knowing whether you want to do something or not.  If I want to go 
to work in the morning or if I don't want to go to work, that's easy.  (Both hands 
palms up.) But when I find myself doing something I don't feel comfortable with, I 
automatically say, "If you’re not comfortable Gloria, it’s not right.  Something’s 
wrong."  All right now.  What I want to ask you is, how can I know which is the 
strongest?  Because I do it, does that mean that’s the strongest?  And yet, if I 
disapproved, that's just part of the thing that’s got to go along with it?  You see, it 
sounds like you...  (Points at self with both hands.) I'm picking up a contradiction. 
I’m not under- I’m not following.
T50
It sounds like you’re feeling a contradiction in yourself too, although you- what I 
heard you  saying in part is uh, the way you like it is when you  feel really 
comfortable about what you are doing.  
C51
Yes, and I have at times, when I’ve made a decision.  Now that seems right.  (T: 
Mhm) That seems perfectly right - no conflict - but then there are times I do things 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 14
that I feel uncomfortable with.  So that there is a conflict there. (T: Mhm) It's not the 
same at all.  So, what I'm saying is, how do I really know when I am following my 
true feelings, if I have conflicts afterwards or guilt afterwards?
 
T51
I see.  Because in the moment, it may seem like your true feelings. 
C52
Yes.  Like if I’m starting to do it -- O.K.
T52
Mhm. Mhm. So that really is tough ah ...  When if you feel comfortable in the 
moment about it, but then afterwards don't feel at all comfortable, which course of 
action was really the one you should have followed?  
C53
You know, the most outstanding thing - I don't know if you are following me, when 
I say about this conflict - the one thing I know is I’ve wanted, for example, to leave 
my husband for quite a few years.  I never did it.  I kept thinking how nice it would 
be, or how scary it would be, but I never did it.  And all of a sudden when I did, it 
felt right.  I didn't feel mean toward him.  I just knew this was what I had to do. 
That's when I know I am following myself.  I am following my feelings completely. 
I have no conflict there.  Some unhappy things came from it (T: sure), but I still have 
no conflict.  That, to me, is when I am following my feelings.  And in everyday life 
the small little decisions, the small little things to do don't come out that clear at all. 
So many conflicts come with them.  (T: Mhm, that’s right) Is this natural? (Knits 
eyebrows.)
T53
Although you are saying – uh, I expect it is – but, but you’re saying too that you 
know perfectly well the feeling within yourself that occurs when you are really 
doing something that's right for you.  
C54
I do.  I do.  (Face relaxes.) And I miss that feeling other times. And it's right away a 
clue to me.
T54
Mhm. You can really listen to yourself sometimes and realize, "Oh no, this isn't the 
right feeling.  This isn't – this isn’t the way I would feel if I was doing what I really 
wanted to do."  
C55
But yet, many times I will go along and do it anyway. And say, "Oh well, I'm in the 
situation now, I'll just remember next time."  I mentioned this word a lot in therapy 
and most therapists grin at me or giggle or something when I say "utopia," but when 
I do follow a feeling and I feel this good feeling inside of me, that's sort of utopia. 
That's what I mean.  That's the way I like to feel whether it's a bad thing or a good 
thing.  But I feel right about me. This is what I wanna…
T55
I, I sense that in those utopian moments, you really feel kind of whole.  You feel all 
in one piece.  
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 15
C56
Yes.  Yeah, it gives me a choked up feeling when you say that because I don't get 
that as often as I'd like. (Smiles.) I like that whole feeling.  That's real precious to 
me. (Touches her face.)
T56
I expect none of us get it as often as we'd like, but I really do understand it.  (Pause) 
(C: Tears come to her eyes.)  Mhm, that really does touch you, doesn't it? 
C57
Yeah, and you know what else I was just thinking? I – I feel dumb saying it uh - that 
all of a sudden while I was talking to you I thought, "Gee, how nice I can talk to you 
and I want you to approve of me and I respect you, but I miss that my father couldn't 
talk to me like you are." (Touches her chin.) I mean, I'd like to say, "Gee, I'd like you 
for my father."  (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't even know why that came to me. 
(Smiles)
T57
You look to me like a pretty nice daughter. (Pause) (C: Looks down.)  But you really 
do miss the fact that you- you couldn't be open with your own dad. 
C58
Yeah, I couldn't be open, but I, I wanna blame it on him.  I think I’m more open than 
he'd allow me.  He would never listen to me talk like you are and not disapprove, not 
lower me down.  I thought of this the other day.  Why do I always have to be so 
perfect?  I know why.  He always wanted me to be perfect.  I always had to be better 
(touches her lips) and uh... yeah, I miss that.
T58
You were just trying like hell to be the girl he wanted you to be.  
C59
Yet at the same time, rebelling.
T59
That's right.  Sure. (Nods)
C60
(Gesturing with left hand from the side of her head.) Like I almost gloated writing 
him a letter the other day and telling him I am a waitress, which I expect him to 
disapprove of. I go out at nights and I almost gloated hitting him back - like, "Now 
how do you like me?"  (T: Uh-huh, Uh-huh) And yet, I really want acceptance and 
love from him.  I mean, I know he loves me.
T60
So you slap at him and say, "This is what I am, now see."  
C61
Yeah. (T: But you- yeah)  "You raised me, how do you like it?"  But do you know 
what I want him to say?  "I knew this was you all along, honey, and I really love 
you." (Wipes a tear with finger.)
T61
Oh, I see. You really feel badly that you think there is very little chance he will say 
that.  
C62
No.  He won't.  He doesn't hear.  (Her voice sad and resigned.)  I went back home to 
him about two years ago, really wanting to let him know I loved him although I’ve 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 16
been afraid of him.  And he doesn't hear me.  He just keeps saying things like, 
"Honey, you know I love you.  You know I have always loved you."  He doesn't 
hear.  (Her eyes moisten.)
T62
That was…  He’s never really known you and loved you and this, somehow, is what 
brings the tears inside.
  
C63
I don't know what it is.  You know, when I talk about it, it feels more flip.  If I just sit 
still a minute, it feels like a great big hurt down there.  That I uh, feel cheated. 
(Reaches for kleenex, wipes her eye.)
T63
Mhm. Mhm. It is much eas… It’s much easier to uh be a little flip, because then you 
don't feel that big lump inside of hurt.   
C64
Mhm. (Nodding) And again, that's a hopeless situation.  I tried working on it, and 
uh, I feel it's something I have to accept.  My father just isn't the type of man I'd 
really like.  I'd like somebody more understanding and caring.  He cares, but not in 
the way that we can cooperate or communicate.
T64
Mhm. You feel “nope” that, "I am permanently cheated."  
C65
Mhm. That is why I like substitutes.  Like I like talking to you and I like men that I 
can respect. Doctors, and I keep sort of maybe underneath a feeling like we’re real 
close, you know, and it’s sort of like a substitute father.
T65
I don't feel that's pretending.  
C66
Well, you are not really my father (laughs). (Raises her eyebrows.)
T66
No, I meant about the real close business. 
C67
Well, see, I sort of feel that's pretending too, because I can't expect you to feel very 
close to me.  You don't know me that well. (Fingering kleenex.)
T67
Well, all I can do is what I am feeling-  that is I feel close to you in this moment.  
(Long Pause.)
C68
[The remainder is not on the film – only on audio recording]
Well, O.K., I'd just like more of it I guess.
T68
Do you feel as though that's a big need, that it would take a lot of caring and a lot of 
understanding to fill it up?  
C69
Exactly.  And I have been so busy trying to get rid of my neurosis.  I'd like to have 
this one neurosis filled.  I'd like to just find someone who is going to love me like a 
father.  I even want this in boyfriends.  I always want to get an older man that's 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 17
caring and more mature and not so flip.
T69
One of the things you really deeply want is to find a father whom you would love 
and respect and who would really like you as you are, and not to just like perfection. 
C70
That's right.  And it seems ironic that since I have been away from my husband, the 
only type of man I go out with are the kind I don't respect - are the young, flip, not 
caring, 'smart aleck' kind of guy.  Not somebody that's really, you know, that I can 
respect.  That seems like such a big thing.
T70
The phrase that comes to my mind - I don't know if it is appropriate or not - you're 
slapping your father in the face, aren't you?  
C71
Oh?  By wanting mature men?
T71
No.  By going out with those who are quite unlike the ones you'd really want.  
C72
But I don't mean to.  I don't understand why they keep coming around.
END of FILM and AUDIORECORDING
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 18
Rogers’ Post-Session Commentary
In spite of feeling initially the artificiality of the situation, particularly the hot lights, I 
very quickly became oblivious to the outside situation, and I think that Gloria did too. In many 
ways I'm glad that she kept pushing me for an answer to her very personal questions about her 
sex life and her relationship to her daughter. I say I'm glad of this because as the relationship 
developed, it became I think completely clear to her as well as to me that she was seeking 
something a good deal deeper than that. Incidentally, I'd like to pay my tribute to her deep 
honesty in being willing to talk about herself so freely.
Although every individual is entirely unique, and in this respect I was definitely 
unprepared for and sometimes surprised by the material she brought up - still, in another sense, 
this was very typical of my experiences in therapy. When I am able really to let myself enter into 
a relationship, and I feel that this was true in this instance, then I find myself not only being 
increasingly moved by being in touch with the inner world of my client, but I find myself 
bringing out my own inner experience, statements which seem to have no connection with what's 
going on, but which usually prove to be, or prove to have, a very significant relationship to what 
the client is experiencing. I felt there were one o two incidents of this kind in this brief interview.
I was genuinely moved, I probably showed it, by the fact that she told me near the end of 
the contact that, uh, she saw me as the father she would like to have. My reply was also a 
thoroughly spontaneous one that she seemed to me like a pretty nice daughter. I guess I feel that 
we're only playing with the real world of relationships when we talk about such an experience in 
terms of transference and counter-transference. I feel quite deeply about that. I want to say, yes, 
we can put this experience into some such highly intellectualized framework, but when we do 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 19
that it completely misses the point of the very immediate "I-Thou" quality of the relationship at 
such moments. I felt that Gloria and I really encountered each other and that in some small but, I 
believe, lasting way, we were each of us enriched by the experience. I am saying these things 
almost immediately after the conclusion of the interview and as is characteristic of me, there are 
not more than one or two statements or incidents which I recall from the interview. I simply 
know that I was very much present in the relationship, that I lived it in the moment of its 
occurrence, and I realize that after a time I may begin to remember it too. But at the present time, 
I really have a very non-specific memory of the whole interview. I'll try to look at it, though, a 
little bit more from an intellectual rather than a strictly feeling point of view. Gloria showed what 
I have come to feel are characteristic elements of therapeutic movement. In the first part of the 
interview, she was talking about her feelings and they were past feelings.. She was talking about 
aspects of her behavior and of herself as if she didn't quite own them. She was looking outside 
herself for a center, or a locus of evaluation, some source of authority. She saw some of the 
things she was talking about in fairly black and white fashion. By the end of the interview, she 
was experiencing her feelings in the immediate moment, not only as evidenced by her tears, but 
by her ability to express very directly and with immediacy her feelings toward me. She was also 
much more aware of her ability to make her own judgments and choices. I guess, put in terms 
that have become somewhat commonplace, you could say that she moved from the "there and 
then" of her life to the "here and now" of elements that she was discovering in herself feelings 
which she was experiencing in the moment in her relationship with me. All in all, I feel good 
about the interview. I guess I feel good about myself in the interview and like Gloria, I feel very 
real regret that the relationship cannot continue.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 20
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be 
sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client 
(S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
Carl Rogers 4th Interview with Sylvia1  -  1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). Carl Rogers’ 4th Interview with Sylvia [Film].]
After filming, comments by Sylvia and Rogers were inserted. The bracketed italicized 
dialogue indicates the voiced over comments.  
[Carl Rogers: This is my fourth interview with Sylvia.  A year previous, Sylvia had been a 
member of a workshop in which I offered to put on a demonstration interview.  I asked 
for volunteers and she was the first one to volunteer.  In front of that workshop audience, 
I held three interviews with Sylvia.  Then a year, uh, intervened before this fourth 
interview.  The interview will be, uh, shown as it was recorded, but with, uh, comments 
both from Sylvia and from myself, at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was 
going on, uh, or to, to, uh, make some comment about what was going on.]  
Carl: Hi.
Sylvia: Hi Carl. (They both sit down, facing each other.)
C:   Good to see ya.
S 1:  I’ve been looking forward to this moment.
C 1: Well, I’m eager to know what’s what with you.
S 2: (Looks down.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (Leans back.) Well, do you mean in terms of the 
past year or right now?  
1 This Sylvia, in session #4, is the same person as the client in the film “The Struggle for Self-Acceptance” 
- session #5 with Sylvia.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 21 
C 2: Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life. (S: Mhm hm)  I 
guess that’s what I’m interested in.
S 2: Well, um, (smiles) I come here with an agenda, (C: Okay.) like, of a particular thing 
I’d like to discuss with you. (C: All right.) And, and I think that discussing it will be 
helpful in terms of my, of my life.  
C 2:  Uh-huh. Then that’s what I’d like you to discuss.
S 3: Well, I think I’m doing very well in many ways, and I need to do some work,           
(C: M-hm.) too. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, the most pressing thing with me is that I plan 
to go to work in the fall, (C: Nods.) full-time, (C: Nods.) and have the care of both 
of my sons. (C: Nods.)  Without any support other than what I’m earning. (4 second 
pause.) And I, and I, I don’t feel very upset about it, but I believe that deep down in 
my body I’m really afraid. (Smiles.)
C 3: Are you afraid of the responsibility or, or what aspect of it is most frightening?
S 4: Well what, what seems most frightening as I think about it is coming home from 
work very tired (C: M-hm.) and having, um, two little boys that need a lot. (C: M-
hm.) (Her voice quivers.)
C 4: Will you really be able to be a mother to them when they, (hands Sylvia tissue box.) 
when you come home from work. Hmmm?
S 5: Well, I’m sure I can do it (gets teary) because I, it’s done every day.  And, uh, the 
women I know an… who are trying to do that are having a really hard time. (C: M-
hm.) (3 seconds pause.)  And I’ve been thinking about talking about this problem 
now with you.  I haven’t really… I, I talk about in a heady way with my friends, 
and, uh, I haven’t given myself any real support (C: M-hm.) with it. It’s a real fear I 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 22 
have, and it’ll probably be really hard. (C: M-hm.)
[Carl: It’s interesting that, uh, because she had saved up this problem to talk about that 
the moment she begins to talk about it she begins to, to, uh, get teary - that’s why I 
reached for the, uh, Kleenex, which she didn’t use. But, uh, it’s evident that, uh, though 
she may have talked about it in a, in an intellectual fashion to her friends, uh, it really 
does have a lot of emotional import for her.]
[Sylvia: Well, I, I don’t know if it’s obvious to you but I started to cry when I said that 
and you know why, you know, I was feeling a lot of sadness.]
C 5: (Talking at the same time) And you haven’t really had a chance to explore it in, in 
depth; you’ve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
S 5: Well, the exploring I’ve done is… (3 seconds pause) I decided for myself- well 
simple, I’ll look for other single working mothers (C: Nods.) with young children 
who are doing well. (C: M-hm.)  And I’ll talk to them and see what they do. (C: M-
hm.)  So I started asking, asking my friends, asking some people I know, “Do you 
know of this kind of person?”  Well after about a month, (quiet laugh) I didn’t come 
up with one, (C: Is that right?) one single woman taking care of young children and 
working full-time who was doing very well (C: Nods.) and that scared me.
C 6: So the track record, the track record that the other people have, the other women 
have makes you really concerned about will you be able to do it?
S 7:  Well that substantiates my concern.
C 8: Yeah. Yeah.
S 9:  I’ve had the concern. (C: Yeah. M-hm.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (C: M-hm.)  I wish, 
(smiles.) I keep wishing I could find some secrets to make it easier for myself. And 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 23 
the only secrets I can come up with are working half-time (C: Nods.) and being 
really, like, no… (C: M-hm.) just barely, you know, paying rent and (C: M-hm.) 
food and so forth and so on. (C: Mhm.)  But, I do know how to do that (pauses) and 
that may be what I decide to do.
C 9:   It’s one possible option at any rate.  Mhm.
S 10:  But it seems like a real limited lifestyle.
C 10:  It is clear to me from the, from the tears that came up the first that, that, uh, this is 
something you feel a lot of concern about, isn’t it?
S 11:  Oh, I feel I’m two things (crying).  All alone (C: Mhm.) and somewhat doomed to 
fail. 
[Carl: I think, at this part, she was feeling, um, uh, quite discouraged after following a 
very good plan.  Some of the responses along here are almost mechanical, like, um, my 
saying that’s another option.  But then when I do pick up on the, uh, feeling that she had 
exhibited at the first, it, uh, brings up fresh all of the feeling that’s, uh, stirred up around 
that.  And, uh, I think my response shows that I’m doing what I, what I customarily try to 
do.  It is to live in the client’s experience and to feel whatever she’s feeling.  This is the 
important thing to really go with the client into whatever feelings there are.  And here I 
really go with her into her sadness.  At times I, uh, feel almost as though I’m speaking for 
the client.  And to me that’s, um, the relationship is good at those times. I feel as though, 
uh, I’m in the client’s world. I’m saying things that she could be saying.  And, uh, when 
she says, “That’s right” it shows I have been right where she’s experiencing it.]
C 11: Mhm.  Mhm. Mhm.
S 12: And, uh, (clears throat) doomed to fail, not that I will die or (C: Mhm.) anything.  I 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 24 
think doomed to fail and to be there for my children (C: Mhm. Mhm.) in a 
positive, cheerful, (C: Mhm.) warm, loving way. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And being a 
single parent, like I will be (C: Mhm.) their support system to a large extent. (C: 
Mhm.)  And it scares me to think of their main support as being exhausted (C: 
Mhm.) and irritated (C: Mhm.) and (C: Mhm.) … (3 seconds pause.)
C 13: You just feel, “I may not be able to make it.  I may be doomed (Sylvia smiles and 
nods.) to failure by the very circumstances.”
S 14: Right. (Nods.) (C: Mhm.) (10 second pause.) And talking about it this way I feel 
two ways:  Like, “Oh c’mon Sylvia.  Everybody else is doing it too.”  And on the 
other hand, like, you’re willing to sit here and talk (laughs) about it with me (C: 
Mhm.) and I appreciate that. (Voice breaks.)
C 14: Mhm. Mhm. But you don’t have to just tell yourself, “Oh, buck up, you can do it.”  
It’s, it gives you a good chance to really…
S 15: (Takes Kleenex and wipes eyes.) Right. Well, I do do that, “Buck up, you can do 
it.”  I’ll do that plenty.  But I don’t get much opportunity to, (C: Nods.) to be sad 
with somebody about it. (C: Yeah.)  How hard it (C: Yeah.) seems. (Crying.)
C 15: Yeah. Yeah. That’s the thing isn’t it?  That to be all alone, with no support from 
anybody, it sounds like…
S 16: Well, I mean (C: I mean…) there are people that (C: Yeah, I know but…) care 
about me. (C: But…)  There’s, like, no financial (C: Yeah.) support. (C: Mhm.) 
And it’s not like I’ll have my mother next door, (C: Mhm.) or something like that.
C 16: You’ll be alone with a heavy burden and it is a sad prospect really.  
S 17: (Nods head.) (Pause 3 seconds.) It feels sad. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.)  And I get… 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 25 
when I, (pauses) I depress myself by thinking, “Well, oh, sure I can give up my 
children.” And I think, “Well, I won’t do that.”  Um, I’m seeing it as a black or 
white thing (C: Mhm.) and I know that’s not reality.  
C 17: (Nods.) But it feels like reality.  That either you’d have to give up your children or, 
or else (S: Mhm.) make a go of it.
S 18: But then I also feel suspicious of myself.  Like, “Well, Sylvia, you’re used to so 
much of getting your needs met.”  Like, going out at night sometimes, (C: Mhm.) 
um, having friends, (C: Mhm.) and, and having a social life and not being overtired. 
(C: Mhm.)  And then I see myself as pampered. (C: Nods and smiles.)  And, uh, if I 
just wasn’t so pampered, (laughs) things would be a lot better.
C 18: That’s when you kind of scold yourself, (: Uh-huh.) really. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm. 
(pause 7 seconds) So that you really feel you’re gonna be hemmed in by that.  I 
mean, your life is gonna be constricted (S: Mhm.) a good deal.  A lot of the things 
you’ve been used to you just won’t have.
S 19: And want for myself.
C 19: And want for yourself. (S: Nods.) Uh-huh.
S 20: Yeah, that’s right.
C 20: So really it does look like a very tough period, doesn’t it? 
S 21: Yep. It does. (pause 13 seconds) But, I like being able to be sad and complain about 
how terrible I’m afraid it’s going to be then I can… like now I’m feeling like, and 
I’m excited too, you know, about facing it.
C 21: Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it… it has excitement as well as dread in it, I 
guess.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 26 
S 21: (Nods.) Yeah about seeing what it will be like, (C: Mhm.) in fact. (C: Mhm.) 
(Sighs).  
[Sylvia: I smiled (C: Mhm .)  a little bit there and I think that I was feeling like a relief of 
tension or, um,  I don’t know how to describe it but a relief of, of after crying and feeling 
sad and then having that feeling pass (C: Mhm. to something else.]
[Carl: It’s, uh, it’s very often true that if, uh, I go with a client into sad or desperate or 
negative feelings that (clears throat) then that satisfies that aspect of their experience 
and then they can move on to something else.  So that it’s very common to have positive 
feelings, uh, follow, uh, very, uh, negative ones. Also I might just comment here that, uh, 
these pauses seemed very brief to me, uh, but to some therapists, to some counselors, uh, 
a pause is very hard to bear.  I don’t find pauses hard to bear.  This was her silence and 
I was willing to let her have it and to speak up when she was ready.  During those 
pauses, I’m very quiet inside. Um, I really am quite content to wait.  Uh, sometimes I am 
reviewing what she has been experiencing.  Um, but I’m not, uh, I’m not trying to look 
ahead, and I’m not thinking about the process.  I’m just trying to feel it as it might be 
going on in her.]
C 21:  It will be a new adventure but it’s one that, uh, you feel different ways about.
S 22: Mhm. Yeah. So that’s, that’s what I think about the most, in terms of a problem 
area. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) Like, the (smiles) way I started crying it seemed like I just 
couldn’t wait to get here and cry about it. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) It was a little 
dramatic that way.
C 22: ‘Cos it is…well, it is, it is a real sad prospect.  And one, I guess, that you don’t let 
out too much to other people, the sad side of it.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 27 
S 23: Right, I don’t do that (C: Nods.) very well.  I, (C: Mhm.) I am busy being strong 
(C: Mhm.) unconsciously. Or I’m also busy being depressed. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia 
smiles) I’ve learned well.  I believe being sad and scared are more dealing with (C: 
Mhm. Mmm.) the problem.
C 23: Mhm. Yeah being, being frightened of what you’re taking on and sad of what 
you’re losing for yourself. (S: Nods.) Those are two very real (S: Hmm.) feelings.
S 24: And I, (pauses) I also think that part of my fear and excitement is that I’ll be doing 
something different. Like, I’ve never worked (C: Nods.) in, in my profession (C: 
Mhm. Mhm.) and been like a confident, (C: Mhm.) single woman with young 
children (C: Mhm.) who are doing well. (C: Mhm.)  And it’s like, um, that’s what I 
want for myself. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia laughs.)
C 24: It’s a goal you’ve been working toward. (S: Nods.)  Mhm.  (3 seconds pause.) I 
wonder sort of how do your children feel about this?
[Carl: Here I simply, um, followed my impulse because I found myself thinking about her 
children, I raised that question with her.  Uh, whether that was a good move or not from 
a counseling point of view is, uh, hard to say until we see what happens next.  You might 
think in viewing this that, uh, I had, uh, thought about what was going on and decided, 
“Here’s a, uh, here’s a piece that’s missing.  Here’s something she hasn’t talked about.”  
Actually that’s not the process that goes on in me.  Uh, I try to be open to whatever wells 
up in me and to say that, to, to act more, uh, from my inner feelings then from, from 
thinking about the process.]
S 25: Well, my youngest son wants me to go work (C: Nods.) so that we can have more 
(C: Mhm.) money and so that he can have more spending money.  And, uh, my 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 28 
oldest son has not, at this time, agreed to live with me yet. (C: Mmm.) But I’m 
preparing (C: Mhm.) with the hopes that he will at that time. (C: Mhm.) He is 
living with… he will be living with me the rest of the summer.
C 25:  Mhm. So that’s another new part of the…
S 26:  And my oldest son and I have a very strained relationship.  He hasn’t been living 
with me the last two years.  And so that’s gonna be another difficult part of what 
I’m talking about (C: Mhm.)  is, um, at the same time needing and wanting to 
improve my relationship with Senate (C: Mhm.) and hoping there’ll be money for 
counseling. I’m hoping (C: Mhm.) that we can do work with a third party or in (C: 
Mhm.) a, uh, family group of some sort (C: Mhm.) because I believe that we’ll 
need help. (C: Mhm.)  And, uh, so that’s, that, that part of the fall or the coming 
year scares me too about feeling so alienated from Senate.
C 26: “Will he, will he really accept me as a mother?”
[Sylvia: Well, he says, “Will he really accept as a mother” to me that is showing me he is 
listening to what I’m saying. (C: Mhm.)  And that even, um, (pauses) I don’t know if it 
was or not at that time but it could be very easily have been a, a helper to me to help me 
focus with what I was, um, wrestling with in terms of understanding or clarifying for 
myself what I was thinking about it.]
S 27: (Phone rings) As his mother, (C: Yeah.) as someone who loves him (C: Mhm.) and 
cares about him.
C 27: So that’s a concern to ya, too.
S 28: (Nods.) (3 seconds pause.) Mhm. And can we get along? Can we live together? We 
haven’t lived together, and he’s lived in a very different lifestyle.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 29 
C 28: “Can we really form a relationship of the kind that both of us would like?” 
S 29: Pardon?
C 29: Your asking yourself, “Can we really form a relationship that both of us will like?”
S 30: (Nods.) Mhm. Yeah, and be happy and, (C: Mhm.) yeah… (8 seconds pause.) 
(Smiles.) That’s an important… I hadn’t thought of that on my own, but you 
mentioning my children (C: Mhm.) brings up the part about Senate, which is a 
very important part of what I think about. (C: Mhm.) And I’m happy I’ll have him 
with us (C: Nods.) during the summer and we’ll be able to have time.
C 30: You can get a start on that. Mhm.
S 31: Mhm. Yeah. (C: Mhm.) When I’m not working, (smiles and nods) for example. 
(Pause 24 seconds.)  Well, I felt awfully rigid about this upcoming filming. (C: 
Nods.)  I felt it in my body a lot.  And I feel, I felt more relaxed since we started.
C 31: Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 4 seconds.) It’s a really difficult thing.
S 32: Mhm. (Pauses.) Right, and just the same it’s exciting (C: Mhm.) to come (C: 
Mhm.) on this trip and to see you again (C: Mhm.)  and it’s also frightening a lot. 
(C: Mhm.)  Ya know, who’s gonna see it? And what are they gonna think? (C: 
Mhm.) And what’s it gonna look like? (C: Mhm.)  Am I, am I being hard on 
myself or am I being good to myself? I don’t know - to put myself in this position 
(C: Yeah.) is what I mean.
C 32: Yeah. (Pause.) You have quite a little of conflict about, “Should I really be doing 
this?  Who, who will see it? (S: Nods.) What will they say?  Am I wise?” 
S 33:  Uh-huh. What’s it gonna be? What’s the finished project,   gonna be? (C: Mhm.) 
(Clears throat.)  Will I ever see it? (C: Mhm.) (Both smile.) (10 second pause.)  
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 30 
[Sylvia: To put myself in a position, um, where I’ll be… I was disclosing very private 
things about myself where other people, I have no idea who all, may be viewing this and 
making their own judgments, and, um, exposing myself, (clears throat) that seems hard 
and, uh, being good to myself, being willing to go through the hardness for the 
opportunity of learning and experience of Carl.  That, I think, is being very good for 
myself.]
[Carl: Sylvia has been quite aware of the filming but has had what I believe is a very 
good attitude toward it.  Uh, that she hopes that by being as natural as she can in the 
interviews, she’ll be making a contribution to the counseling field.  Both in the interviews 
a year ago and clearly in this interview, the relationship with me has been very important 
to Sylvia.]
C 33: (Pause 10 seconds.) Looks to me as though your eyes are saying something, but I 
don’t know what. (Smiles and laughs.)
S 34: Well, I’m thinking about how moved I’ve been when I’ve heard your voice a few 
times over the past year. (C: Hmm.)  And now I’m here.
C 34: That made a…
S 35: I wanna take it in – (C: Mhm.) being here.
C 35: Mhm. (Pause 3 seconds.) I guess you’re saying that I mean a good deal to you.
S 36: Well, this time with you. (Nods.) Yes, you, mhm. (Smiles) (Pause 12 seconds) I’m 
thinking about what I want to talk about or I’m feeling kind of empty right now 
about talking.  (Pause 5 seconds.) 
C 36: Can you tell me what I do mean to you?
S 37: (Smiles.) Yes, I can. (Pause 8 seconds.) Well, (Pause 4 seconds) I think the best 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 31 
thing that I like to think about you is that as I understand your writings, I have not 
read very much that you’ve written, but that you have, that you live what you write 
about.  And my understanding of a lot of popular writers are they write one thing 
and somehow they just don’t quite live that.  They live something very different. 
And so I think of you as, (laughs) um, (pauses) wonderful in that way and not, 
uh… (Pause 3 seconds.)
C 37: But what does that mean to you?
S 38: (Sighs.) (Pause 3 seconds.) Well that it’s what I would like to be more: (C: Mhm. 
Mhm.) to have values and be able to, to do them (pauses) and to live them.
C 38: (Pause 4 seconds.) You’d like to have a good match between your life (S: Mhm.) 
and what you believe (S: Mhm. Mhm.) and value.
S 39: (Pause 3 seconds.) And what I also sense about you is, uh, like “patience” isn’t the 
right word, but I see you as being comfortable with yourself so much so that 
whatever I or anyone else says or does, doesn’t (pause 3 seconds) get you uptight.
C 39: (Laughs.)
S 40: (Laughing.) And maybe it does. (C: Mhm.) Sometimes it probably does ‘cause 
you’re a human being.
C 40: It certainly does, that’s right.
S 41: But it doesn’t seem like it does (C: Mhm. Mhm.) too much.
[Carl: I really was not quite accepting of her, uh, of her feeling that, uh, in the 
relationship I clearly was not uptight.  It strikes me that what she’s saying here is, uh, 
practically a, uh, statement of the, uh, attitudes that, uh, we have found most effective in 
therapy.  She’s saying that she experiences me as being genuine.  Uh, she experiences me 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 32 
as caring about her.  Uh, and I think it’s quite clear that she feels that I understand her 
empathically.  And those are the elements that, uh, both in experience and in research 
have shown up as being the most, uh, potent elements in a counseling relationship.]
S 42: And I like that. I would like to be more present (C: Nods.) and, and comfortable 
with myself so that other people, including my children and so forth and so on, 
could do what they do, and that I could be able to be a source of support and not be 
personally threatened (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) by this little thing and that little 
thing.
C 42: And that, that has meaning to me.  You’d like to be sufficiently accepting of 
yourself, that then you can be comfortable with what your children do or what 
other people do  (S: Nods.) and not, uh, (S: Mhm.) not feel frightened, (S: Hmm.) 
thrown off balance. 
S 43: (Nods.) Mhm. And I’ve enjoyed through the year in the few letters that I’ve gotten 
from you, your warmth, and interest in me, in my life.  I’ve liked that a lot from 
(C: Mhm.) you. And at the time those letters were written we had no plans to (C: 
No.) make a movie (C: No.) or all that stuff so that was really enjoyable. (Pause 5 
seconds.) Do you feel answered well?
C 43: Yeah. Mhm. Mhm.  (Pause 15 seconds.)  And I’m interested enough in you to 
know of any other things in your life that are important to you or that, uh, that are 
difficult for ya, or whatever.
S 44: (Pause 15 seconds.) Well, I’d like to go one of two ways. I don’t know which yet.  
Uh, one way would be back to the single working mother business.  I’m not sure 
where we might go with that, but I know it’s a big thing for me.  And another way 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 33 
would be to go with the difficulty I see myself in having with my relationships 
with men. (C: Mhm. Mmm.) (Pause 3 seconds.) I do so much analyzing (smiles) 
that I, I feel like throwing up my hands. “What’s the use of even talking about it?”  
But I…
C 44: But you do have (S: I…) difficulties in…
S 45: Yeah. I’ll, I’ll go with the men.  (C: Okay.) And that’s the most frightening thing 
for me to talk about (C: Mhm.) on this film because people that I know will 
probably be seeing this (C: Mhm.) and men that I know.  (4 second pause.) I see 
myself, uh, and this, this is real scattered in my mind. (Sighs.) Scattered, (smiles) 
and looking every which way. (C: Mhm.) Well, I see myself making acquaintance 
with men, many men, I mean not just one man (C: Mhm.) and spending some time 
with that person.  And then, um, feeling that they lost interest in me or that I turned 
them off.  And I tell myself things like, “You can’t expect every man you meet to 
fall in love with you.” (C: Mhm.) And, um, let’s see, (smiles) what else? (C: But 
you feel that you…) Oh and then I’ll tell myself all these reasonable… “Of course 
this man doesn’t like me because I’m this and I’m that and.…” But, I don’t very 
often feel the disappointment and confusion about “Well I had a good time with 
that man.”  And it seems to me like he must not have had a good time with me 
because I didn’t hear from him again, or I did and things went such and such a 
way.  And, uh…
C 45: Sounds like it seems kind of mysterious to you. (S: Uh-huh.) Why the men lose 
interest in you.
S 46: Uh-huh. And then I have feedback from one person, one man friend of mine, who 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 34 
says that I create, ya know I turn people off, men, myself.  And so it’s like it’s all, 
it’s all my doing anyway. (C: Mhm.) But I have felt lately impotent about how to, 
(Pause 7 seconds.) how to have a successful long rel- long lasting relationship with 
a man.  Successful, I don’t mean perfect, I mean (C: Yeah. Mhm.) workable. (C: 
Mhm.) And, uh, I think workable is successful (C: Mhm.) these days. (Smiles.) 
Yeah.
C 46: Well, that’s a part of your life in which you just haven’t had the kind of, um, 
success that you wish you had had.  Mhm. Mhm. An important lack in some way.
S 47: (Nods.) Now I’m remembering we talked about this before.
C 47: A little bit.
S 48: A little bit, right. (Sighs.)  (Pause 7 seconds.) And I do that, the kind of analyzing 
that ‘”Well I have all these habits like, uh, I, um, I like to be by myself, I’m not 
real generous and outgoing (C: Nods.) and taking care of, of people that I meet.”  
And the woman that I live with says that she doesn’t see me doing that at all like, 
“Oh come in I’ll fix you dinner, I’ll do this, I’ll do that.” Like I don’t do that. (C: 
Nods)  And, and so I’m confused about do I need to do that to be in a close 
relationship?  It doesn’t seem to me like I should (C: Mhm.) need to sell out to be 
um enjoyed and wanted.
C 48: I gather what you mean by “selling out” is that if you, if you really put yourself out 
in kind of an artificial way, you don’t want that.  Is that what you’re saying?
[Carl: This is a good example of a client experiencing confusion.  And, uh, she tries to be, 
to talk about it rationally.  But it’s clear that what she is experiencing is just confusion 
itself.  I feel this could have been a better response had I really heard her feeling that she 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 35 
is powerless in, her, uh, relationships with men that she simply doesn’t have what it takes 
to build a workable relationship. I believe this feeling that, uh, “I have some fundamental 
lack in myself” is one of the commonest feelings that one meets in counseling situations.  
Almost all of us at times feel “there must be some terrible flaw in me or I wouldn’t have 
such problems in my life.”]
S 49: Yes, if I do all these things for a man, so then he’ll want me.
C 49: Mhm. Kind of buying his favor, (S:  Nods. Mhm.) as it were.  And you just don’t 
see yourself doing that.  Don’t wanna do that.
S 50: Or wanting to do it. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) (S: Nods.)  And then I… another question, 
hard question, I ask myself is, “Well, I’m choosing men to relate to that don’t know 
how to give in the way that I want to be given to.” (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And then I try 
(smiles) to figure that one out. (C: Mhm.)  “Oh simple, I’m choosing, that just 
means I need to choose differently.” (C: Mhm.) And then I look around and it 
doesn’t seem so simple.
C 50: Mhm. You say you’re trying to analyze and analyze and analyze what, “what lack 
in me?” or “you know what lack in me?’ I guess your asking yourself mostly, 
“What lack in me keeps, (S: Hmm.) keeps me from having a lasting (S: Mhm.) 
relationship with men?” 
S 51: And one thing that now I’m recalling that really frightened me was I was talking- I 
lived with my husband for eight years (C: Nods.) and I felt rejected by him and I 
left him. (C: Nods.)  And I left him for a man I was very much in love with that 
I’ve been very close to (C: Mhm.) for five years.  But he’s also… like, I moved 
away from him but I felt left (smiles) by him also.  And so this man friend of mine 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 36 
said to me, “Well, what’s wrong with you that you can’t keep a man?” And that, 
uh, that really scared me inside because when I look at the situation in a practical, 
sensible way that doesn’t seem like reality. (C: Mhm.) But then I don’t know 
maybe it’s true.
C 51: But that her saying that (S: He.) he saying that, (S: Uh-huh.) uh, really does touch 
something in you. “Is there something wrong with me (S: Uh-huh.) that I….“
S 52: That I don’t see. (C: Mhm.) And, and, uh, just the fact that it touched me so much 
shows me that there’s something there.
C 52: Mhm. It, (S: Sighs.) it wouldn’t bother you that much, or you wouldn’t think so 
much about it if there wasn’t something in you that that refers to.
S 53: Mhm. (Nods.) And I, (sighs) I see my mother that way a lot, that my mother not 
being able to have a successful relationship with a man and so that’s been my 
model and… (Pause 3 seconds) like, why can’t…
C 53: You’re saying, “Maybe, maybe I’m just following the same pattern as my mother.”
S 54: Mhm. Well, I am in that respect and I don’t like it. (C: Mhm.) And I’m not willing 
to do a bunch of crummy stuff that I… (C: Mhm.) (Pause 6 seconds.) So, right now 
(smiles) I’m living alone (C: Mhm.) and I’m not doing any crummy stuff. (C: 
Mhm.)  And I also have some very nice relationships.  It’s (smiles) those shades of 
black and white.  (Pause 8 seconds.) But I do feel a lot of confusion about building 
an intimate relationship. (C: Mhm.) A monogamous type (C: Mhm. Mhm.) or 
primary…
C 54: So you can have good times and all that, but still there is this nagging question or 
these nagging questions, “Am I just following my mother’s pattern?” “What is 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 37 
wrong with me that I don’t have a permanent relationship with a man?”
[Sylvia: I don’t ever recall feeling like Carl wasn’t understanding me or… because if I 
did have that feeling there was something I could do about it right then and there in 
terms of helping him to better understand me, so then I did feel understood.  His intention 
was to very much to be with me and, uh, if I got the sense that he wasn’t that we could 
talk about that.]
[Carl: I think this interview is a good example of the fact that, uh, when the relationship 
is good, the client is able to take more and more risks.  Sylvia begins with material which 
is quite present in her awareness, and yet by the end of the interview she is dipping into 
material which she doesn’t understand, which she’s a little bit fearful of expressing. Uh, 
She has gone several levels deeper during the interview and to me that’s, uh, the mark of 
a process of therapy that in the long run will be successful.  Perhaps through this whole 
interview, it’s evident that, uh, following the client’s experiencing, being a companion to 
the client in whatever, uh, is going on in her does lead to opening up new, uh, areas of 
concern, new explorations, leads her into new, uh, territories.]
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 38 
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may 
not be sold. 
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client 
(S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
Carl Rogers Demonstrates Client-Centered Therapy
Transcription from the Video of the Film
"Struggle for Acceptance”
Session 5 with Sylvia - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). The struggle for self-acceptance.]
[Commentaries are typed in brackets and italics to distinguish from the actual interview.]
Carl Commentary 1: [This is my fifth interview with Sylvia. The fourth interview had 
been held on the previous day. Prior to that there had been the three interviews a year 
earlier. The interview will be shown as it was recorded, but with comments both from 
Sylvia and from myself at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going 
on,uh, or to make some comment about what was going on.] 
Carl: Well, where would you like to start this morning?
Sylvia1: Well, uh, I want to tell you about something that I've been thinking about and 
that’s it's a, a sharing more than  (C: M-hm.)  telling you a problem.  (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 2: [So often clients and counselors get the feeling that, uh, the 
relationship is one which must be filled only with problems. Uh, Sylvia gives a little 
indication of that, this is just a sharing, it's not a problem.]
S1 (continued):  And that is I’ve just recently noticed in myself that I've been learning. 
(She laughs a little.)  (C: M-hm.)  And that's a big deal. Uh, I hear people say all the 
time, “Oh, I've learned so much, I learned this and I learned that and that was such a 
learning experience.” And I, all these years that I've been grown up, I haven't felt any 
learning, and I feel, “Well, what did you learn and how did you know that you 
learned it?” And it was a mystery to me.  (C: M-hm.)  And just the last few weeks, or 
actually I've been realizing in the last year mainly is that I’ve learned some things  (C: 
M-hm.)  and I know I've learned them and I, I know that, okay, that I'm at this point 
and with a certain situation or idea and that six months ago or three months ago it was 
different.  (C: Uh-huh.)  And so I'm feeling my learning and that's really exciting.
C Commentary 3: [A relationship should be one in which good feelings have just as 
much place as bad feelings, and here she's bringing out some very positive feelings about 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 39 
herself, which is a healthy and valid part of a counseling relationship. It's always 
exciting to me to, uh, hear a client telling of positive steps which, uh, he or she has been 
taking, and here Sylvia sounds confident as she's doing something that she has decided to 
do in her own way, not necessarily following all the books, but doing what she feels and 
experiences is right.]
C1: And it’s the awareness of it that's new.  (S: Uh-huh. Yeah.)  That you're beginning to 
realize, “Hey, I am different in this respect,  (S: Uh-huh.)  I've learned something.”
S2: I've changed.  (C: Uh-huh.)   And I can see the difference and feel the difference. (C: 
Uh-huh.)  Yeah.
C2: What are some of those differences?
S3: Well,  (small laugh)  um, I, I've made a decision to be more strict with my children  
(C: M-hm, m-hm.)   and to, uh, to listen to them but decide that I'm their mother and 
I know many things they don't, and that I will make many more decisions than  (C: 
M-hm.)  I've made in the past. And uh- 
 
C3: M-hm, m-hm.  Sounds as though you feel a bit stronger that way.
S4: Yes. And and I've been trying it.  (C: Uh, m-hm.)  Trying being the more strict person 
and it's working beautifully.  (C: Uh-huh.)  Uh, they at first they, you know, have 
their little resistance or whatever it is but then we go on with the program, which is 
my program more,  (C: M-hm.)  and I feel a lot better about that as being uh uh 
helping children to adjust to the world.
C4: I mean, sounds, sounds like you feel more like a grown-up mother.
S5: M-hm. Capable.  (C: M-hm.)  Of making appropriate decisions.  (C: M-hm.)   For 
them. And another area is sex. And, uh, and I, I've done a lot of things in the past 
year, in the past mainly year that I haven't done before. That is, I've had intercourse 
with a few different men  (C: M-hm.)  and put myself in situations where before I 
was absolutely unwilling to do because of my fears and, and I've learned some things 
about myself. Like I know a lot more right now today about what kind of sexual 
relationship, what kind of intimate relationships that I want to have with men and 
that feels good.  (C: M-hm, m-hm.)   Beca ... and, um, and it only came through, uh, 
risking I mean there was no, it only became through trying things out, there was no 
amount  (C: Uh-huh, uh-huh.)  There was no amount of, of therapy or reading or 
thinking or talking  (C: M-hm.)  that helped me to learn those things,  (C: M-hm.)  
but it was feeling strong enough within myself that I can take chances.
C5: So risking has been the road to learning  (S: Yeah.)  in the sexual area.
S6:  Uh-huh.  (C: M-hm.)  And it is with my children  (C: M-hm.)  and it is with relating 
to people in many ways, not just sexually.  (She smiles.)  (C: M-hm.) Other ways too. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 40 
(C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 4: [Sylvia is showing a lot of risking behavior. She's risking a good deal 
to talk about things like this on film. But what's more important is that she has come to 
the point in her own life where, where she realizes that her own experience is the best 
guide for her, not books, not therapy, not anything outside of herself. It is her own 
experience from which she can learn, and here she is learning in a very sensitive and, uh, 
personal area and is willing to share that with us.]
S6 (continued):  Reaching out to people and approaching strangers and, uh ...
C6: Taking all kinds of risks that you hadn't before.
S7: Some. More,  (C: M-hm.)  which, I mean I, I don't know about all kinds.  (C: Yeah.)  
Quite a few, and it's been exciting  (C: M-hm.)  and hard.
C7: And I guess that leads to a, uh, to a deeper kind of learning, or at any rate, a learning 
that you feel more sure of.  I guess, I get a sense of assurance in what you're talking 
about. An assurance in you.
C Commentary 5: [One thing that has been true with Sylvia in every interview we've had 
is that she thinks carefully about what she says, she thinks carefully about what I say, 
and when what I say is not correct, doesn't match her experience, she's quite willing to 
correct me. She is very precise in both describing her own feelings and also in making 
sure that my response to them is also accurate.]
S8: Well, yes. Yes and no.  (C: Uh-huh.)  And I ... I ... feel more im...  like I, I was saying 
before, I feel more immature and more and I'm more aware of my immaturity.  (C: 
M-hm.)   They're both, uh, a part of each other.  (C: M-hm.)   And uh, does that 
make, does that, I guess I'm thinking that it just sounds crazy.
C8: No, I don't
S9: To say that I feel more mature because I know I'm how, I know more about how 
immature I am.
C9: Uh-huh. No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
S Commentary 1: [I was surprised at what I said made sense to him. I think that I 
thought that it made sense to me, but that doesn't necessarily mean it would make sense 
to other people. I mean, it made in my own system of what was said. It felt good that he 
could understand me and he knew I that, that it made sense to him too.]
C Commentary 6: [It's important to Sylvia to make sure that she's accurately understood. 
Can anyone understand how she can be more mature by being aware of her immaturity? 
Well, to me, that's quite understandable, but it's clear that she wants to make certain that 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 41 
my understanding extends to that degree.]
S10: It does.
C10: Uh-huh. Because you’re, you're uh more aware of all aspects of yourself  (S: M-
hm.)  and it sounds a more acceptant of them too. “Yes, I'm mature in certain ways  
(S: M-hm.)  and here's some ways I know I'm immature.”
S11: And I didn't know that before,  (C: Uh-huh.)  or I, I knew I felt uncomfortable that I 
didn't understand it.    (C: M-hm, m-hm.)   But that's related to something I've been 
thinking about, I think, about being here with you and, uh, and telling myself two 
things.  (C: M-hm.)  One is, “Oh, you're just a, I'm just a dependent personality,” 
you know, Carl Rogers or blah-blah-blah-blah, don't, I don't run my own life.  (C: 
M-hm.)  I go for help a lot.  (C: M-hm.)  And then I tell myself  I’ve always been so 
strong and so together and having everything so worked out in my head that I don't 
allow myself to, to be helpless in a situation where it might be  (C: M-hm.)   good 
for me.  (C: M-hm.)  Like right now here with you, I would like to be more helpless, 
which to me means open, I think.  (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  To what to us and, uh, and I 
see myself being, uh, together and not being helpless.  (C: M-hm.)  
S Commentary 2: [I think at that point I was feeling concern that I was just gonna go to 
another session of being all in control of things and and rattling on and on. I probably 
made a conscious decision that that I have to do something to, to break that and, uh, 
which was talk about it, talk about my fear. My fear was or concern that I wouldn't learn 
anything.]
C11: Sounds as though you, you voice that as a conflict, but it sounds as though really 
you're more on the, on the side of the second aspect that, uh, uh, to be open and, 
and in that sense helpless and vulnerable, I guess might be a possible term too, um, 
is something you, you really believe that's what you are, rather than that you're a 
totally dependent person and really helpless and have to, have to run for help. I sort 
of get the feeling you like this aspect of you that is able to be with me in a way that 
is, uh, more open, more vulnerable perhaps.
S12: Well, I like it and I also scold myself for being dependent,   (C: M-hm.)  so there's
C12: There are the two sides, uh-huh.
S13: there's something missing in the middle to connect,   (C: M-hm.)  and I it seems like 
you might have been talking about that and I still didn't hear it.
C13:  (Nods.)  M-hm.  (S: Mm.)   So really to get it more accurately, you scold yourself 
for for being dependent, for, for wanting  (S: M-hm.)  to be here, for example, with 
me,  (S: M-hm.)  and yet at the same time you, you feel. uh, well, that's good, I, I 
really like that, but where's the, where's the integration of those two, uh, points of 
view.  (S: M-hm.)   (Sylvia nods.)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 42 
S Commentary 3:  [That seemed to me like a very excellent, um, not paraphrase, but 
when he, you know, tells me back  (C: M-hm.)  what he thinks I meant, it, um, solidified 
what I expressed in the previous comment about that there was something missing. It 
made more sense to me.]
S14: That's right. (small laugh)  (pause of 7 seconds)  May I hold your hands again?
C14: Sure. M-hm.  (They lean closer and clasp hands and remain holding hands.)
S15: To feel that old feeling.
C15: Okay.
S Commentary 4: [When we did that filming in A_____, we held each others' hands the 
whole time, and I imagine that it occurred me that it might be good to do that again. I 
feel good. At that time, I, I wanted to get away from being in my head so completely the 
whole time, experiencing.]
C Commentary 7: [I felt very comfortable during this holding of hands. Uh, I'm reminded 
of a friend of mine who said that he did eye therapy and, uh, in a sense that's what this 
was. Our eyes were very much in contact, and, uh, I think as much was going on at a 
non-verbal way as in a verbal way. It was a close relationship, and we both experienced 
it that way.]
S16: (Clears throat.)  (pause of 11 seconds)  I would like to be less, uh, less strong right 
now. I would like to give myself the gift of not having to be sensible  (C: M-hm.)  
and reasonable and (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  Also the protection,   (C: M-hm.)  protect,   
(C: M-hm.)  protect myself.
C16: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm. Really would be giving yourself a gift if you could just kind 
of let go  (S: M-hm.)  and not, uh, not be so   (S: M-hm.)  competent   (S: M-hm.) 
and able.  (S: Mm.)  (She nods.)   (pause of 5 seconds)  
C Commentary 8: [It seems clear that the reason she wants to hold my hands is that she 
wants to experience something that is very frightening to her, namely to drop her 
competent, reasonable, strong self and let herself be some of the weakness and 
vulnerability that she is.]
S17:  And I think it helps to touch ( C: M-hm.)  (Carl nods.)  you, to, to, to let go of the 
shoulds,  of my  (small laugh)
C17: M-hm, m-hm. And you feel some contact and maybe you can say, “Well, maybe I 
don't have to be so strong, so  (S: M-hm, mm.)   Maybe I can just let go more.”
S18:  (pause of 5 seconds)  Yes.  (small laugh)  (She sighs.)  ( pause of 22 seconds)  I 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 43 
want to get away from all, um, my rationalizing right now this minute, and I don't 
know how to do that  (C: M-hm.)   except to shut up.  (Carl nods.)  (C: M-hm, m-
hm.)  And,  (pause of 5 seconds)  so it's not like I have so much a desire to sit and 
not talk and look in your eyes as I have a desire to not be the way I am all the time.  
(C: M-hm.)   And I don't know yet  (C: M-hm, m-hm.) what else to do.  (C:  M-
hm.)
C Commentary 9:  [In the interviews that we held a year ago, the silences were very long 
and Sylvia found a, a great deal of security and, uh, seemed to profit a great deal from 
holding my hands during the interview, and here she, uh, returns to the pattern of a year 
ago. It's another indication of the fact that these interviews with her perhaps rest more 
solidly on just the fact of the relationship than they do even on the content of what, uh, 
she's saying and talking about.]
C18:  Have to be kind of silent, to let go of that rational and rationalizing part of you.
 
S19: M-hm.  (pause of 25 seconds)  It feels easier to focus on, uh, in this position that I'm 
in now with you I feel more focused,  (C: M-hm.)  (He nods.)  yeah.
C19: Are there any things that sort of come bubbling up?
S20: Yeah, I know it's something I want to talk about.  (She smiles.)
C20: Okay.  M-hm.  (pause of 10 seconds)  (She smiles.)  But it's not easy, huh.
S21: No, it's not easy and I'm enjoying the richness of feeling  (C: M-hm.)   your hands 
this way and letting go of some more of, of the camera business  (C: M-hm.)  and 
the ...    (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  And, uh, and the fear about bringing up something that  
(laughs)  (clears throat)  and knowing that in about fifteen minutes it'll all seem, um, 
(sighs, smiling)  I don't know not quite as serious.  (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 5: [It just had to take its own time for me to get to where I could feel like I 
could say the words that I needed to say. It was almost like waiting and just like, uh, you 
know, what else is new while I'm waiting? For something that took a natural process that 
it had to take.]
C Commentary 10: [If anyone has a doubt about the value of silences, it should be 
removed by this interchange. Sylvia's saying, “I'm doing more work when I'm silent than 
I am when I'm talking.”]
S Commentary 6: [His specific comments or the content of his comments is not 
necessarily helpful as opposed to not helpful, but what it does do that is valuable is that it 
gives me something to bounce against. It's a stimulation to better focus myself.] 
S21 (continued): There's something I've been wanting to talk over with you.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 44 
C21: Okay.
S22: Good. I'm real attracted to black people.  (C: M-hm.)  And, uh, that's about the 
craziest part of me, um, I'm ashamed  (C: Mm.)  Um, I'm embarrassed, not right 
now this minute, but when I'm out walking around.  (Carl is nodding.)  (C: When it 
happens, m-hm.)  And living my life.
C22: You feel what an awful thing it is that I'm attracted to black people.  (S: M-hm.)  
C Commentary 11:  [I think that from the time that she first wanted to hold my hands, I 
felt that she probably was going to make use of that closer relationship to get to 
something that she hadn't been able to express before, and now she's taking really a 
great risk in talking about something very private, very personal.]
S23: Not, and not all the black people I see  (C: M-hm.)   but a lot.  (C: M-hm.)  And, uh, 
like the black people that I talked it over with, it seems, it doesn't seem like any 
problem at all, they understand perfectly.  (C: M-hm.)  And, but my family, I think 
it's a real painful situation for them when I have as many black friends as I do.  (C: 
M-hm, m-hm.)  And-
C23: That sounds like not only your family looks down on it or something but that you 
scold yourself for it too.
S24: Uh-huh, right. I, I think there's something wrong with me.
C24: Yeah, that's it.
S25: Um. But it doesn't-
C25: “What kind of a crazy person am I that I feel attracted  (S: Well, sick...)  to so many 
blacks?”
S26: Sick, sick I think of it as
C26: Sick, that's 
S27: and ne... neurotic, um.  (C: Hm.)  Strange.  (C: Mm.)  (She closes her eyes and 
clears her throat.)  (pause of 7 seconds)
C27: You really feel that there's something sick in you that causes you to have so many 
black friends.
S28:  (Opening her eyes)  Well, I keep looking for a reasonable explanation  (C: M-hm.)  
and there is none.  (She laughs a little)
C28: So there isn't any reason except that you feel that way.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 45 
S29: M-hm. And I ...
C29: And that isn't good enough.
S30: Well, I, I, I've been struggling so long to accept that in myself and I'm still fighting. 
It's like I'm fighting to accept that in myself and, and letting go rather than thinking 
it's a terrible thing  (C: M-hm.)   and and that I can't let other people know.  (C: 
Hm, m-hm, m-hm.)   And, uh,
C30: You feel “I should not feel that way. I shouldn't be that way. Sick.”
C Commentary 12:  [I think by that response I was trying to exaggerate her feelings in
order to assist her in, uh, becoming more accepting of them, but as I, uh, listen
to it I think I might have responded more powerfully by responding to
her struggle to accept herself as a person who is attracted to blacks.]
S31: Like when I, wh ... , I imagine when I meet a black person that I am attracted
to, that that person will know   (He nods.)   (C: M-hm, mm-hm.)   and I always wonder if 
they can tell.
C31: Mm, see if it shows.  (S: Uh-huh.)  M-hm, m-hm.
S32: And that they'll think I'm strange.  (C: M-hm.)    M-hm. And it has something to do 
with all the black/white sex stuff that goes on, like, um, black women and white 
men which is very foreign to me, I have very little thinking or, um, concern about 
that. But the black men/white women thing,   (C: M-hm.)   um. and I'm attracted to 
a lot of black men.  (C: M-hm.)  Yeah.
C32: It has something to do with the sexual attraction.
S33: I know, yeah, it does, I know it does.  (C: M-hm.)    But it's not just that, it's also  
(C: M-hm.)   children and and women and lifestyle  (C: M-hm.)   and as I see it 
through my tunnel vision, which I do.  (C: Uh-huh.)  (clears her throat)
C33: So I guess you're saying, um, yeah, there's a sexual element in it but
I'm also attracted to their way of living.
S34: M-hm. That I see.  (C: Yeah.)  And I, but I think what I see isn't what is.
C34:  (He nods.)  That's partly your fantasy or something.  (Sylvia nods.)  (pause of 8 
seconds)  
S35: Maybe putting that, that, this on this film will help me that  (She smiles.) stand on 
the ground and be who I am.  (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  And not be so ashamed, so 
embarrassed and so,  (C: M-hm.)   um, uncomfortable.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 46 
C35: In a way you're saying it out loud and really in a wa ..., in a sense, publicly, may 
help you to feel “I don't need to be so ashamed of that.”  (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 13:  [I've filmed a number of interviews, but I never had a client 
knowingly make use of the filming to try to gain more acceptance of self and clearly 
that's what Sylvia is doing in this interchange. By putting herself clearly on record, she 
feels perhaps then she will feel less ashamed, less sick, more, uh, truly acceptant of the 
person that she is and the experiences that she has.]
S36: And I tell myself I should be joyful, I mean,  (C: M-hm.)  (She laughs a little.)  why, 
why negative?  (C: M-hm.)  And I, I guess, you know, the culture or I don't know, I  
(sighs)  (pause of 6 seconds)  
C36: But you feel disapproved of probably, certainly by your family and maybe by the 
culture in this respect.
S37: My friends don't understand.  (C: M-hm.)  My white friends.
C37: M-hm, m-hm.  (He nods.)  (pause of 10 seconds)  Makes you feel different.  (S: 
Hm, hm.)    Set apart or something like that.  (pause of 6 seconds)
S38: Well, sometimes I feel different but I know a lot of other people, I believe a lot of 
other people feel the same way.  (C: M-hm.)   and I know a lot of other white 
women are attracted to black men. So I believe that's common.
C38: So that somehow you know you're not alone in this.
C Commentary 14:  [Here's another example of the fact that expressing all the negative 
attitudes she has toward her own attraction to blacks leads her to realize this really is 
not so bad after all; there are positive sides of it. Other people, other women feel the 
same way.]
S39: But it seems like the strength of my feelings and, uh, the on-goingness and my de ..., 
my desire to identify with the black culture and,  (C: M-hm, m-hm)   um, is. is what 
seems out of proportion to me. That I feel out of proportion about it.  (They both 
nod.)
C39: M-hm. So Okay, other women feel the same way but not to the degree that you do, 
you think.  (S: M-hm.)  That's kind of out of  (S: M-hm.)  Out of scale.
S40: Or in general to the degree too, not just man/woman, but  (C: M-hm.)  people. 
(pause of 15 seconds)  Maybe I,  (small laugh)   it'll come a time accepting that part 
of myself.
C40: Maybe someday you won't be ashamed of yourself for that.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 47 
S41: M-hm. Maybe someday I can be proud of myself.  (C: M-hm.)   And for what I 
believe and feel.  (C: M-hm.)  And I'm gradually learning to do that.
C41: Uh-huh, m-hm. So, perhaps what you are and what you feel will be something you 
can take real satisfaction in instead of feeling   (S: M-hm.)   how shameful.
S42: M-hm. And to me it's it's a sign of my growth is being able to do what I'm doing 
with you now, you'll make a film.  (C: M-hm.)  (She laughs.)  (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-
hm, m-hm, m-hm.)   It's a real brazen thing to do.  (C: Yeah.)  M-hm.
C42: Feel this is a risk.  (S: M-hm.)   And that's a sign of learning and of growth.
S43: M-hm. Well, also it somehow it's a little different from a risk in the sense of some of 
my friends say, “A film? Wh... What do you want to do that for?”  I mean, there's 
suspiciousness about it and … 
C43: M-hm, m-hm.  (He nods.)  So that's seen as another strange part of you.
S44: Well, not so much, I mean, that's not a
C44: Not so.
S45: It doesn't bother me.  (clears throat)  (pause of 11 seconds)  Sometimes I, well, right 
now  (She laughs and he nods.)  sometimes, I have the sense of talking away what 
we were talking about and I'm wondering, if I went away, if I withdraw from the 
subject, uh, what's your perspective? It seems like we were talking about my 
attraction to black people and now we're not. And I'm, I don't know, like did we 
finish talking about it or did I withdraw?
S Commentary 7: [My sense is that I was feeling confused about what was going on.]
C Commentary 15:[I think this is a sample of Sylvia's sharp awareness of her own 
experiencing. I don't believe that in content we had left the subject of her attraction to 
blacks. But she realizes in herself that somehow she has withdrawn from that. She's, as 
she says, talked away from it. Obviously, that's because it has been a, a frightening 
subject to her. Perhaps also because she feels she's gone as far as she can go with it at 
the present time.]
S45 (continued): Um
C45: It's more of your analyzing it, isn't it, trying to think  (She nods.)  about what's 
happening. “Did I run away from it? Or was I finished with it?”  (S: M-hm.)  Or 
continue think about it
S46: analyze it  (small laugh)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 48 
C46: Instead of asking, “Do I feel as though I'm finished with it?  (S: M-hm.)  Do I feel 
as though I'm escaping from it?”
S47: I like that. I like your your questions, or comments.  (C: M-hm.)  Do I feel finished?  
(pause of 10 seconds)  No, I don't, I don't feel, I don't know  (He nods.)  about 
escaping  (C: M-hm.)   and feeling finished, it's
C47: The feeling is one of uncertainty.
S48: M-hm.  (She nods.)  (pause of 35 seconds)  Well I I feel like I want to go back and 
listen to what we just talked about,  (C: M-hm.)  that I didn't hear it very well.  (C: 
M-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm.)  And ...
C Commentary 16: [This is one of the commonest experiences when a person delves into 
areas that are sensitive, where they've exposed themselves in, in ways that make them 
very vulnerable. Sylvia, like many other clients, hardly knows what she has said because 
it has come so close to her inner feelings, because it’s such a delicate experience. 
Incidentally, this is one point where a wrong response on the part of the counselor can 
be very frightening and very threatening because her inner self is really very exposed at 
this point. This inability to remember is the, uh, defense of the self against being changed 
too rapidly. It probably would be very good for her to hear this later and to begin to 
accept more fully what she's just been expressing.]
C48: “What did I say? What did I feel?” You'd like to have a rerun of it and it
S49: M-hm. Like I just went jabber-jabber-jabber-jabber.  (C: M-hm.)   And all that.  (C: 
M-hm.)  And so-
C49: Sounds like you scold yourself for that, as though, “Oh, I just talk talk-talk.”  (She 
nods.)  (S: M-hm.)   It didn't sound like just talk-talk-talk to me.
S50: It didn't? 
C50: No. 
C Commentary 17:  [Throughout these interviews, my own feelings have been largely 
empathic and caring ones. Here's the first time that I express some other feeling of my 
own. I simply couldn't permit her to scold herself for what she's been doing, and so I 
said, “It doesn't sound like, uh, just talk-talk-talk to me,” which was a very real feeling 
on my part at that moment.] 
S Commentary 8:  [At that time I had the feeling that Carl was really asking me 
something that he wanted to know. Like genuinely interested and concerned about that.]
S51:  (pause of 6 seconds) Well, I would like to hear it again,  (He nods.)  and it has, it, 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 49 
and slowed down somehow,  (C: M-hm.)  and I now  (small laugh)  I could think 
like taking your hand and looking at you and slowing down.   (C: M-hm, m-hm.)   
And then when I'm slowing--and that's what I want to do ...  (C: M-hm.)  But while 
I'm doing it, I'm scolding myself.  “What are you doing this for?”
C51: M-hm.  (pause of 5 seconds)  Let me give you a very brief rerun of part of it. You 
were saying, “I'm ashamed of myself for being attracted to black men. Uh, I know 
many other women have some of the same feeling, but it seems to me I have that 
feeling disproportionately strong and uh my family is critical of that, the culture is 
critical. Um, I'd like to be able to accept those feelings in myself. Maybe I'm 
making a little bit of progress along that line, but still it does seem a need to be a a 
strange part of me that I don't understand.”   (She nods.)  (pause of 10 seconds)
S52: That's right.
C52: “And part of that attraction is sexual but I'm also attracted to their children, to the 
way they live, to a lot of things about them.” (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 18: [Sometimes when I show what an accurate listener I am, I feel proud 
of myself and I do in this moment.]
S53:  And what I, what you said that strikes me the most is it’s the part of me I don't 
understand,  (C: M-hm.)   it's a part of me I don't understand.
C53: It just is, but you can't quite uh can't quite get at the reasons for it. You have to have 
the reasons.
S54:  (Laughs a little)  (pause of 5 seconds)  And I don't know why I have to have the 
reasons,  (C:  m-hm.)  I don't have to explain to anybody.  (C: M-hm.)  So it seems 
like I don't have to have a reason.  (She smiles.)
C54: M-hm.  (pause of 20 seconds)  So maybe the intellectual understanding isn't as 
important as you thought it was.
S55: I think the acceptance is what's most important,  (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  my acceptance. 
(C:  M-hm.)
C Commentary 19:  [As she has shown throughout the, uh, interview, as she says, she 
analyzes and analyzes. She has to see the reasons for all of her behavior, and
now she's taking a little bit lighter look at that, and realizing, "I don't have to have a 
reason for every bit of my behavior, I don't have to understand all of it. I can simply 
accept it. Perhaps I can simply accept it." I admire Sylvia's courage in being willing to 
voice the very, uh, intimate feelings she has on film. I believe that both the expression of 
those feelings will be constructive for her and that the willingness to share them with a 
wider audience will also have a positive effect in her life.] 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 50 
C55: “If I could accept it, I wouldn't have to understand in the sense of knowing the 
reasons.”
S56:  (Nods.)  Or explain to anybody.  (He nods.)  (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.)  M-hm.
C56: Sounds like that's what you're doing in imagination a lot, trying to explain it to 
somebody.
S57: M-hm.  (pause of 25 seconds)  It seems like I'll probably never understand it.  (Both 
nod.)   So I can make life a lot easier for myself by not trying.  (They both nod.)
C57: M-hm.  (pause of 5 seconds)  It may be one of those things that if you can accept it, 
you wouldn't need to have all the explanations.  (pause of 9 seconds)  
S58: Wonder what  (She closes her eyes for a moment, sighs and clears her throat.)   what 
keeps me, um,   feeling like I need to justify myself.  (C: M-hm.)  Like that's a more 
basic
C58: M-hm. It's a broader statement of it.
S59: than about a particular view, accepting myself about this and about that.
C59: M-hm. You would in general feel “I have to justify myself with proper reasons.”
S60: M-hm.  (pause of 20 seconds)  (smiles)  Well, do you do that? Do you
C60: I suspect we all do, some.  (S: Yeah.)  M-hm.
S61: So there's nobody that just  (Both laugh.)  floats along on their  (Both laugh.)  
intuition. That’s not it either. So what I need is more balance really.  (C: M-hm.)   
Not that I’m wrong to justify it, but that I can be more, justify it less and feel more,  
(Both nod.)   (C: M-hm, m-hm.)  and feel comfortable.  (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 9: [This experience that I had with Carl is, uh, real special to me and, uh, 
one of the things about it that feels real close to me is the emotional safety I felt with him. 
That there was somehow a, a boundary or a fence or a something that, uh, separated the 
space that I was in with Carl from the rest of the world and inside that space I was very 
safe and I would not be hurt. I didn't have to have any fear that I would be hurt no matter 
what I said or did, and the focus of my thinking was how very safe that felt. Another thing 
I felt from him that I think has affected me some over this time is that I felt, uh, like 
support from him to be myself, to listen to myself and to respond to myself and to care 
about, to put myself first. I think about how my life might have been changed by my 
experiences with Carl. I think Carl's caring for me in the way that he did, his, uh, 
modeling, helping me to learn to care for myself, where like maybe my most important 
resource would be myself.  (C: Yeah.)  So it seems to me that in his style of relating 
there's a lot of support to do that, a lot of encouragement and influence to listen to 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 51 
myself.]
 END OF SESSION
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 52 
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be 
sold. 
 
 
Kathy Interview by Carl Rogers (Circa 1975)
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1975). Three approaches to psychotherapy II [Film]. 
Orange, CA.]
Rogers:  I want to meet this client as a person. And I want our encounter to be that 
of two persons. I have no desire to have advance information regarding 
her. I'll work with whatever she wishes to reveal of herself. It's my hope 
that I can first of all be myself. Be present. Be real in the relationship. I 
usually find it easy, also, to feel a caring for the client. But I can't predict 
in advance whether I will feel that. I would like to let myself enter into her 
inner world of feelings and perceptions as accurately and as sensitively as 
I can. In order to experience that kind of empathy, I'11 need to lay aside, 
as far as possible, my own biases and preconceptions. The extent to which 
I can do that will to a considerable degree determine the progress which 
she is able to make in the time we have together. I feel I'm a responsible 
therapist. I'm responsible for doing my best to create a facilitative climate 
in which she can explore her feelings in the way that she desires, move 
toward the goals that she wishes to achieve. It's in this deep sense that my 
approach to therapy is centered in the client. Aiming to empower him or 
her to search out and experience the areas of conflict or pain, to perceive 
self in new ways, to choose to follow new options in behavior. It is my 
own self I find feelings other than those of caring and of understanding I'll 
feel free to express these; but as my own feelings, not as any judgment of 
or guide for the client. Or, especially on a first interview, I may have no 
other feelings than a prizing of the client and a desire to in-dwell in her 
experience. There's no way I can tell in advance. For me each encounter 
with a client is fresh, unpredictable, often enriching to my learning as well 
as hopefully, enriching the self-learning of the client. So I look forward 
with eagerness to whatever our time together may bring.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Introduction, page 53 
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may 
not be sold. 
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the 
client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 
Carl Rogers’ Interview with Kathy -- 1977
T:
Hi, Kathy.
C:
Hi, Dr. Rogers.
T:
I'm really glad to meet you.
C:
Thank you.
T: 
    And… I don't know whether you're feeling a little uptight under these lights and 
all, but I think I'm feeling a little uptight, but I don't think that will last very long. 
And I have, not having met you before I, I don't have any idea what sort of 
concerns or issues you want to bring up, but I'd be glad to hear whatever you 
want to say.
C1:
I'm not quite sure where to begin.
T1:
Uhm, hmm.  
C2:
But, uh, some of my concerns are, um, I've become very much aware since 
my husband was killed last December, um, my own feelings of aloneness.
T2:
Uhm, hmm.
 
C3:
And I don't think it’s directly related to his death because we had been 
separated for about four years before he was killed.  And I, I became aware 
that, after he died especially, that he was really very important in my life.  I 
was kind of using him as a shield against going out and having other 
relationships.  And now he’s gone and I can't use that anymore.  And I feel 
very, very frightened of new male relationships.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 54
T3:
So in some way his, his death, uh, really made you aware of the fear you have 
of, of new relationships, especially with men.
C4:
Right, right.  Definitely, I didn't have him.  I didn't have that to hide behind 
anymore.  And, uh, I had a tremendous feeling of loss when he died because I 
did care for him.  But, um, in going out with other men lately, I just have this 
feeling of, uh, it's very strange.  I'm very uncomfortable.
T4:
So that, the feeling you have is something more than just the loss of him.  It's 
a different feeling, a fee1ing of uneasy or scared or unsure.
C5:
Yes.  For a long time I didn't feel like going out and that was fine.  I was 
going through my loss of him, but that was all right.  I didn’t push it or 
anything.  But just recently I started going out and I've been aware for years of 
how lonely, I have been very, very lonely.  I haven't been dating very much 
for the last four years, mostly just working and taking care of the kids.  And 
um, I think I'm keeping myself in kind of a no-win situation where I'm really 
lonely.  And yet it's kind of like I'm keeping myself there because I've got a 
guard around me, and I'd kind of like to break out of that.
T5:
It’s as though you're in some way sort of responsible for your loneliness.
C6:
Yes, I know that.  I'm very… I am.
T6:
And that's something you'd like to break out of that shell, or that safeguard 
that you've been hiding behind.
C7:
Part of me does.
T7:
Part of you does.  Ok, ok.
C8:
Part of me says, “No way”.
T8:
So it really is a very ambivalent, two-way thing. (C takes a breath) I suspect 
it's been pretty comfortable, um, behind that safeguard; it's more of risk if you 
break out.  Is that part of it?
C9:
I, I can almost, well I was going to say I can almost go back to the point where 
I really built up that safeguard in me when my marriage was going bad.  Over 
five years ago and I could feel myself, and I know I did, I withdrew and I’ve 
been withdrawn ever since.  It's kind of like, “No more.  I don't want any more 
hurt.”  So…
T9:
Uhm, hmm, it's just too damn risky, taking the possibility of being hurt again. 
And you've withdrawn from that for a long time.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 55
C10: 
Uhm, hmm.  See, and I've been aware of this for a long time too, but I never 
go beyond the awareness level.
T10: 
So that the knowledge isn't new, it's the um, question of what you do about it.
C11:
That's right, that's right.  How can one stay safe and still be open?
T11: 
The way you shake your head makes me feel, “I don't see any way.”
C12:
I don't, I really don’t.  If I did, maybe I probably would have done it a long 
time ago, but I don't.
T12:
Just seems kind of unbearable to, to be, open with a person and yet feel safe.
C13:
I, I think I'm a pretty open person to begin with.  And uh, everything is fine in 
a relationship as long as the focus does not turn onto me.
T13:
I see, I see.  If you can keep the focus on the other person you're ok.
C14:
That's right.  And the focus on me up to a certain level, but not in the romantic 
kind of a way.  A friendship, I would value that.
T14:
But love, you want to, keep that at arms length.
C15:
But you know, that's important though, because um, if a person doesn't want 
to really be your friend, how can you have them for a lover?
T15:
Uhm, hmm.
C16:
No way.
T16:
Not quite sure I get that.  You mean friendship is a necessary first step, is that 
what you're saying, or…
C17:     It is for me.
T17:
Yeah.     (Long pause)
C18:
We've gotten to the point where I won't go beyond.
T18:
Uhm, hmm, that's what I was sort of thinking.  You've thought your way this 
far, but then where do you… 
C19:
I've laid the cards out and that's all I want to play.
T19:
So that, in this relationship it's like in your other relationships.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 56
C20:
That's right.
T20:
It goes so far and then, “Let's stop.  That's as far as I want to go.”   (Pause)      
(C: Hmm.)  If you go any further, there's a risk, isn't it?
C21:
Yes, it is.
T21:
And I think your eyes tell me you're feeling that risk right now.  (Pause)
C22:
So here I am.  (Pause)  I feel like saying to myself, “Well you got this far.  It's 
not so bad.” (Laughter)  It's all right; I make the best out of it.
T22:
It's all right up to this point.
C23:
Yeah, right.
T23:
So let’s laugh it off.
C24:
Yeah, make a joke.  Talk about something else.
T24: 
Could, very easy to run away from yourself.
C25:
See, but that's it.  I made a bargain with myself.  There's two parts:  the part 
that understands and it’s all right, and the other part that's scared silly.  But the 
part that understands isn’t going to force the part that's scared.  When it’s safe 
enough, I'll be kind to myself.
T25:
And let the scared part come out when, when you’re ready for it, when…
C26:
When the scared part feels ready.  It’s as if part of me is in a cave away from 
the rest of the world.  But it cert-, I certainly can't come out of that cave, 
unless I know that it’s all right, that there won't be a lot of pain to greet me.   
What's the sense in coming out?  So it’s up to the best of me to make sure that 
there are nurturing people around me.
T26:
And when you feel safe enough, either in this relationship or with other 
people, then you can let yourself come out of the cave and let the scared part 
of you emerge.
C27:
That's right.  That's why, that's why I value the friendships with men and with 
other people.  I don't care for the rest.  Not to say that I don't need it, I do, but 
I need the friendship, and the safety and the security of that first.  I, um, took a 
trip not too long ago and I met a man that I had known years and years ago, 
only very briefly.  And I met him again I went out with him.   And he was 
such a lovely person, such a kind person, and a very ... a very good person.  
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 57
Anyway, it was in the mountains and as I was driving home from his, um, his 
home, looking at the mountains, I, I had this feeling.  It’s kind of funny, I 
haven't read the Carlos Castaneda books, but I know the concept of the third 
eye.  And I was feeling as I was driving through those mountains that, “Now 
it’s all right for my third eye to come out, and to be able to perceive.”  And I 
felt so good. But when I came back home, I've kind of busied myself with 
woodworking, and the house, and that kind of thing.  And I'm kind of back in 
the same environment, in the same predicament.  But I know that I, I 
consciously at times choose between focusing in on things and not.
T27:
I'm, I'm really interested in that experience, when you were away from him, 
then there was just a little while, when it felt safe.  And you could perceive… 
C28:
When I was driving. 
T28:
Yeah, when you were driving and you could perceive yourself and the whole 
situation, I guess.
C29:
I could perceive, it doesn’t have much to, it did have to do with him, but I 
could perceive myself, and my closed-offedness.  And at that time I was open, 
and I had that perception of myself and that awareness that I had been closed. 
And that, when I was driving through that canyon I was feeling very open and 
now I could have my understanding, and it was a1l right. 
T29:
You let yourself for that time come out of the cave.
C30:
Yeah, yes, it was great.  And then he came to see me.  He flew in to see me a 
couple of weeks ago.  And um, I felt, see I was aware I had this memory of 
that opening up and so I felt more guarded.
T30:
Ah, is that right.
C31:
But kind of slowly unpeeling layers, or slowing coming up.
T31:
But somehow, having, having come out of the cave, you were afraid you 
might come out of the cave too easily.
C32:
Too, yeah that's right, that's right.
T32:
“So, watch out, be careful”.
C33:
That's right.
T33:
You sound like a very tender, vulnerable part of you that lives in that cave.
C34:
I think my most tender part. (C cries)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 58
T34: 
Your most?
C35:
My most tender part.
T35:
Your most tender part. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.  It's really a very 
precious part of you that you keep in the cave
C36:
(C takes long breath)  I, for a long, long time, I’ve had the feeling of 
hopelessness of ever coming out.  And do you know life is an existence 
without all of you… 
T36: 
Without?
C37:
 …all of you.
T37:
Yeah, I see.
C38:
Right.
T38:
So, you, the hopelessness, I gather is because you know you're not living with 
all of you.  Part of you you're keeping well hidden.
C39:
That's right.
T39:
Well guarded.  And it isn't really living, unless you can live it with all of you.
C40:
That's right, it's just doing things, just doing things.  The part that, you know, 
that I consciously avoid are the arts.  The things that I love, music, theater, 
paintings, that kind of thing.
T40:
Those are the things that touch your feelings.
C41:
I don’t get to the core.
T41:
Ok, things that touch your feelings or touch the core of you, those you want to 
stay away from.
C42:
That's right.
T42:
They got, they get too close, too close to this very tender part of you.
C43:
(Pause) I’ve reached another stop.
T43:
Uhm, hmm, but you felt safe enough to let out a little bit more and now it’s 
come to another stop. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 59
C44:
(Pause) I have to give equal time to all of my dimensions.  We just have, I just 
felt, you know, in touch with my vulnerability, but now I’m feeling angry.
T44:
Ok.
C45:
Like, “It’s none of your business…”
T45:
Uhm, hmm.
C46:
…what I'm feeling.
T46:
Uhm, hmm, what am I doing getting that close to the vulnerable part of you?  
“Damn it, stay away.”
C47:
That’s right, that’s right.  What do you want to do that for?
T47:
Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
C48:
You've got other things to do. (C laughs)
T48:
So you’re putting up all kinds of guards against me, and striking out, “What 
the hell are you doing”, and, “getting so close to the vulnerable part of me, 
why don’t you go do something else”, hmm?
C49:     That's the part that keeps me lonely.
T49:
Uhm, hmm.  So that, that pushing away part, that kind of angry, “Get away 
from me” part, is what keeps you very lonely.
C50:
It's like I don't really trust that I can trust you to know that.  I can tell this and 
that.  You may feel a little something about it, but what then?  You know, I 
mean you know, “It's a nice story, so, big deal, something else to do”.
T50:
What I hear is that, is that you feel that I don’t really care, just a story… 
C51:
That's right.
T51:
Just something… but what if I do …
C52: 
You know…
T52:
But what if I do care.
C53:
(C takes a breath) I want to make a joke and say, "Aw, go on." (C laughs)  
You know, um, I'm a nurse and, a psychiatric nurse, worked in a psychiatric 
hospital last year.  One of the big things there, the patients got a lot of points if 
they would talk in group.  I mean everybody wants you to talk.  You know, 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 60
the good patient talks.  And I thought, you know, anybody can talk. The 
reason why people don’t talk is not because they can’t talk, it’s because they 
don't know how people are going to respond. That's where it’s at. So I don’t 
think the patients were not being good patients. I don't think they were being 
bad patients because they weren't talking. I think that the staff should have a 
demerit for not responding. Ok, these patients talked, now how do you 
respond?  Makes it a whole new ballgame.
T53:
Yeah.
C54:
And so now, I talked. (C laughs)
T54:
You've earned some points.
C55: 
Yeah now I earned my points, that's true.  But, um, I think that’s the fear of 
everyone.   It’s not so much revealing themselves, but being cared about.  
That's my fear.  That's my fears after I've revealed myself, “Who cares?” 
T55:
It's uh, when you've let out a tender part of yourself, then it’s damned 
important to know, “Does this other person care?  Does it make any 
difference?”
C56:
My husband used to say he cared, but it was just words, it was words.  He um, 
I think he cared as much as he could care but, he had so many conflicts inside 
of himself that he didn't even see me as a person. Didn't even see me. It's not 
that he didn't want to care. It's that he couldn't, he was too busy with himself. 
But I understand that. And I understand that with other people, too. But see I 
just can’t go around revealing myself all the time to people who are just too 
busy with themselves.
T56:
Uhm, hmm.  You need a response, you need a caring, you need to make a 
difference to somebody.
C57:
That's it, not to someone who’ll say, "Oh, well, Kathy, I really care," and then 
I don't see them for a couple of years. Or, "I'll call you" and then they never 
call. You know, when I first split up from my husband, I would go to these 
different functions, not with a date, but with friends, and meet a man and he'd 
say, "I'll call you".   And for a while there I'd be sure that I wasn't home, 
because I couldn't stand to know if he didn't call.  And that way I didn't know 
if he didn't call, so there was a possibility that he had called.  But I wasn't 
home, so how could I know. So with that, that, that vulnerable I was really in 
touch with it. 
T57:
It makes so much difference to you to know whether the other person is going 
to really respond.  “When they say they care, do they care?” 
C58:
That's right, caring people, will call you, or drop by, “How's it going?”, that 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 61
kind of thing.
T58:
And that's not enough?
C59:
No, it would be enough, if they would do that. (C laughs)  That'd be just great, 
that would be just great.  I don't think I really want that much from another 
person.  The morsels are fine, but I'm not even getting the morsels.
T59:
Uhm, hmm, it isn't as though you want a whole meal, it's that…
C60:
Yeah, I mean I could work up to it all right.  That's why I think with this 
friend it was nice.  And may have gone back in but I felt myself, come alive a 
little bit.  A little bit of magic had come into my life, and that was nice.  And 
I'd rather not come out all at once and run back in.  I'd rather come out bit-by-
bit and stay out. But see the thing of it is that, and like we're talking now, a 
little bit, or I'm thinking about the focus of the relationship, it has to be this 
male-female kind of thing.  And, um, I don't think that what I need to do is to 
come out and have love, and then, think about a male-female relationship. But 
I don't know how I can come out too much without a man (C laughs).
T60:
That's kind of a, contradiction, in a way. A dilemma, it's a dilemma. (T 
laughs)  But you feel what you want first is a relationship with a person, only 
it helps if it’s a man.
C61:
That's right.  It must be a man. Or… 
T61:
It isn't just better if it's a man, it's a necessity.
C62:
It must be a man, that’s right, because that's where my fear is.
T62:
So that's where you fear is, a fear of a relationship with a man.  And yet, you'd 
like to be able to really come out of the cave first, before it became a man-
woman, sexual relationship, or anything like that.  Is that what you're saying?
C63:
I'd like to have a caring relationship.  And its kind of funny, it's like a little girl 
wanting a man to take her out of the cave, and, care about.   I'll put it back on 
me, I feel like a little girl.  Someone to care about me and to know that I'm 
comfortable and that I'm all right, and then ask for himself.
T63:
And then ask?
C64:
For himself, of the relationship.
T64:
But first, you'd like to have a man come at least to the entrance of the cave 
and take the hand of you as a little girl and lead you gently out, caring for you. 
Then maybe, other kinds of things might happen.
C65:
(Pause) The little girl is the non-sexual, being.  That's right, “Don't use me 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 62
sexually first.  And then if you like it good enough, keep coming back.” That's 
what I don't want.
T65:
 The little girl, the little girl will grow up if you care enough, for her.
C66:
That's right, and can respond as a woman, if the other is there.
T66:
 Can you tell him that? Could you tell him that?
C67:
I'm confused, do I tell one man that, or is that what I… 
T67: 
I was thinking of this, this one man.
C68:
Oh, this individual. 
T68:
Uhm, hmm. 
C69:
Oh, I think I could tell him that, I know I could.  But you know, I start putting 
him down.  (T laughs)  I know that's just, my sister told me, she said, “That's 
just because you're scared.”  Because I told her the kind of man I would, I 
thought I would be comfortable with, and he is this kind of person.   And then 
I start telling her all these bad things. And she said, "Nobody would be 
perfect. You would do this with anyone, some."  But with this person I think I 
could.
T69:
 Maybe you could let him know what you need.
C70:
I'd like to be able to carry that over.  I suppose maybe, maybe I'm glossing 
that over or something, but I'd like to carry it over in my relationships with 
everyone. To get what I need from the relationship, and not focusing in on the 
other person.  See, I think the way I am I'm the perfect nurse, the perf-, you 
know, anything for somebody else.  And that's fine, focus in on them any 
time. But on myself, like I'm too scared to do that.  Like that's a no-no.  But I'd 
like to be able to do that, focus in on my own needs, first.  But I feel kind of 
selfish when I look at it that way.  I fee1 like a taker instead of a giver and 
that's got a negative, connotation.
T70:
You're so much a nurse that when you even think of saying, “But I need this 
for myself.” that seems kind of wrong, selfish.
C71:
“Wait a minute, you're the nurse.  What is this?”
T71:
“You're supposed to be caring for the other person.”
C72:
That's right.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 63
T72:
But once in a while you realize, “I'd like to care for myself, first.”([Pause)
C73:
Seems awful. (C laughs)
T73:
Just to say that. 
C74:
“You're so naughty, just thinking about it.” (C laughs)
T74:
Just to say that, seems, “What a selfish person I am.”
C75:
Yeah.
T75:
“Terrible, awful.”
C76:
I feel wicked, but I enjoy it.  I'm enjoying thinking about it.
T76:
It's fun just to imagine, “I might want something for myself, first.”
C77:
It's really a lovely fantasy to be completely narcissist, completely self-
centered, and into pleasure, and into comfort. (C sighs)
T77:
Just being good to yourself.
C78:
But in a way, you know, in a way I am being good to myself by keep that 
vulnerable part of me away until it's safe.  Because not everybody would be 
good to you, not everybody would be kind.   There are people who would use 
you up, and not bat an eyelash, and not even think about it.
T78:
So you have a real respect for your, for your instinct for preserving yourself.
C79:
That's right.
T79:
You can't trust everyone, not everyone would care.  (Pause)
C80:
I was just smiling, I was thinking, but I care.
T80:
And you say that with a smile, but that's pretty deep too isn't it?
C81:
Uhm, hmm.  I do care.
T81:
“I care for myself”.
C82:
I like caring.  I like it.  I like caring for myself, and not giving away every part 
of my, just because some Tom, Dick, or Harry wants it.
T82:
“I really prize myself, and I'm proud of that.  I'm not going to just give myself 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 64
away.”
C83:
That's right.  It's nice to have that feeling of caring for myself, that's good.  
But you know since Dick died, I was thinking, I could die tomorrow.  Any of 
us could, and, I'm missing, I want to have more.  I don't want to just care for 
myself, I want to, I want to be able to care for myself and at the same time be 
able to take in life more.  But I'm not doing, see I've closed it off, if I could 
figure out some way of doing that, then, you're smiling (C laughs), so that'd be 
just great.
T83:
To be able to care for yourself, and yet open yourself up to life, and somehow 
that also tied up with the realization that, “You know, death will come one 
day.”   You'd like to live before you die.
C84:
That's right, I want, I saw a card one time that said, “Born, and then died.”  
And you open it up and it says, "In between, he lived" or something like that. 
That's what I would like for myself, a little life in between the born and the 
death, a little more life, and pleasure.  See that's what I'm missing.  Deep 
down inside is the, pleasure, experience of pleasure and joy, those kinds of 
experiences.  I've been happy.  I have fun.  I do enjoy my children, but it's on 
a limited level.
T84:
You don't really open yourself to joy.  I guess fun, yes sure.
C85:
But joy is on a deeper level, you see, so…  I want to say, "But how've you 
been lately?" (C laughs).
T85:
Well, “Lets change the subject.” (T laughs).
C86:
Yes, “How's your wife, your house?” all that.
T86:
Um, it'd be pretty nice to just, run away from some of this.
C87:
It would, yes.
T87:
Just talk.
C88:
Well let’s just have a rest for a while.
T88:
I'm impressed with the fact that when you need a rest, you really take it.
C89:
Oh, thank you.  I was thinking my humor comes to the rescue, “Give me a 
breather.” 
T89:
It's one of the ways in which you preserve yourself.
C90:
That's right; I had a dream one time.  And I dreamed that I was on a sled with 
two other girls, and we were going down a snowy hill.  And we were going 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 65
too fast.  And I told them to stop, they had to get off, otherwise they were 
going to crash into this train station at the bottom of the hill.  And they 
wouldn't believe me.  So I got off, and they went on.  And I side-stepped in 
the snow all the way down the hill, but there were lots of trees where I was 
side stepping, and I was hanging onto the trees, one by one as I went down.  
And when I got to the bottom of the hill, the sled had crashed, or something.  
And then I thought to myself, “That means, that has to do with me.  Part of me 
would go too fast, and…” 
T90:
And, and this morning has been an example of the fact that you're not going to 
go so fast that you crash. (C: That's right.)  You're going to go at your own 
pace if its step-by-step down the hill, oh, that's the pace you have.
C91:
That must be it.
T91:
Maybe that's a good stopping point. 
END
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 66
Rogers’ Post-Session Commentary
I found it fascinating, the way in which this client very slowly lowers 
her defenses. I think those defenses could be broken through, but that in my 
estimation would not be as helpful as letting her proceed at her own pace. I 
think the client learns more that way. We did progress in the interview. We 
went from her perception of loneliness as her problem, to her fear of her 
relationships with men, to her feelings about letting the tender, vulnerable part 
of herself come out of a cave, to the recognition of the little girl in her that 
wants to be tenderly let out. She then began to get to the recognition of the 
deep, of the pain that is deep inside of her. That is unspeakable, almost 
unbearable. We saw her partially experience that pain, in spots, and then draw 
back. Then finally we saw the feelings that she has, that perhaps at bottom she 
is completely unlovable, one of the commonest feelings that people have. I 
thought that the dream at the end was almost a perfect description of the hour. 
She went deeper into herself, step-by-step, by slow degrees, cautiously and 
guardedly because she didn’t want to crash into that pain. And she took 
resting times between the steps. So I thought that described the whole 
progress of the hour. I feel that it was a working interview, not highly 
dramatic, and much of therapy is work, and this was a good example of it. I 
felt present to her.  I felt a companion in her exploration. If I were to continue 
to see her I think that she would gradua1ly move toward experiencing that 
care of herself of which she is quite frightened. I like the way we got into 
metaphors. Clients can say more in metaphors then they can say, than they 
dare to say openly. And I like the way I responded to the metaphors.  I liked 
the way she was able to express her anger toward me whenever she felt it, 
whenever she felt that she was close to a dangerous part of her experiencing a 
painful part of her experiencing and that was easy for me to accept that anger. 
I felt good about this as a first interview.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Post-Session Commentary, page 67
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be 
sold. 
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) 
are numbered for easy reference.
Carl Rogers' First Session with Dione (Code name)
Dialogue from the film, “The Right to be Desperate.”
1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on 
anger  and  hurt [Film].  American  Personnel  and  Guidance  Association  (American 
Association for Counseling and Development).]
The film includes stopped images with Rogers’ voice giving comments about the 
interview. All of the dialogue of the interaction between Rogers and “Dione” is included. 
The voiced over sections do not censor any parts of the interaction. They are in brackets 
and italics.
T:      Well, I'm really glad to meet you.
C 1:   Okay.
T 1:   I've heard a few things about you, all good things, and I've also heard that you have 
leukemia but that you're in a state of remission, and that’s all I know about you . . . 
so from there on ...
C 2:   Okay.
T 2:   Whatever we do is up to us. What things do you feel you want to talk about today?
C 3:   I don't know. I was sitting in the room and waiting, before, and I was thinking 
about when I was about 7 or 8 years old. I remember reading a book, I believe. 
And I can't recall the name, by Jung, I think it was. I recalled that when I was 
reading it, at that time, I used to go down in the basement of my home and um, turn 
off all the lights. And in a way, that was kind of closing the outside world out (C: 
Mhm, hmm) and concentrating on what I wanted to do and what I wanted to be. 
And at 7 years old I was into that, and today I'm in the same position . . . um, really 
at this, you know, trying to find out what I want to do, what I want to be. And um, 
I've learned a lot of things. I've learned a lot of things since I found out that I have 
leukemia (T: Mhm, hmm) which is about a year ago this June . . . and I've learned 
an awful lot of things.
T 3:    I'll bet. And you're going through a stage if I understand is a little bit like what it 
was at seven, sort of shutting out the world or shutting yourself into a space where 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 68
you're trying to figure out what it is that you want or who you are?
[Rogers’ voice over a stopped image Commentary 1: Clearly he has rehearsed this first 
portion and yet, the material is of interest. Whether it's superficial or deep, I want to 
understand the exact meaning his experience has for him. Whether it's true or false, real 
or imaginary, this kind of presenting material is very common in first sessions, and is to 
be expected and to be respected.]
C 4:   I think that I've listened for so long to other people about who I was (T: Mhm, 
hmm) and I remember in 2nd grade I was a potential credit to my race. That was 
one of the . . . (T: Mhm, hmm) I used to wonder why I couldn't be a credit to 
somebody (T: laughs) else's race also. I think I was really conditioned to be 
something. To be some kind of a symbol, or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, and not 
really being a person, you know, I kind of missed out on my childhood to an 
extent. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't really regret it. I don't think I regret it anyway, but 
I've really been through a lot of changes. And I think that now, after finding out I 
had leukemia and after dealing with the leukemia in the way I did, it's just really 
incredible, you see. It was last June when I found out, and um, I proceeded to get 
everything in order because I was told that I had less than a year to live. (T: Mhm, 
hmm) And uh, that was the trip. (T: I'll bet.) That was a trip.
T 4:   A trip into a fairly dark place, I suppose.
C 5:   Oh, yeah. For sure. For sure. On one hand I accepted the death. I, you know, at my 
young age I think I've lived long and a great deal. But that was the start of some 
things that really has had an effect on me today. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm much happier 
than I've ever been . . . today. (T: Hmm) I'm much happier. (T: Hmm) But there's a 
lot of hurt too. There's an awful lot of hurt and I think I'm just beginning to realize 
that. Um, because you know, in being a credit to your race, in being an outstanding 
student, an outstanding scholar, an outstanding football player, whatever; it leaves 
you little room to be . . .
T 5: You've been meeting other people's expectations of you and it seems that that's what 
you should do now. I guess you're really questioning that very much.
C 6:   Oh, yeah. Tremendously. And like you get into . . . the fun thing about it is that I'm 
finding out that some of the things that I think inside of me are okay. And like that 
isn't . . . you know, I feel okay, and I'm in a process of becoming okay. But like I 
haven't worked it out. Hurt is a hard thing to deal with. And like conditioning 
yourself to die (T: Mhm, hmm) is another thing, you know, you see, I didn't let my 
family in on that (T: Hmm) until March of this year. So it was some months before 
I . . .
T 6:  You carried that within you.
C 7:   Oh, yeah. But I proceeded very meticulously to carry out a plan, where my children 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 69
would live in an area that I wanted them to live. And that, I was trying to control 
something after I died. Only when I went back this year in March to celebrate my 
children's birthday, and I had four weeks, incidentally, to live at that time; I was 
told on March 15 that I had four weeks to live. And it was really incredible because 
like, for the first time, I saw all my relatives and my friends. And they were coming 
in and they were very loving, very loving people, and very kind, you see. Um, but 
at the same time, they were all throwing flowers on my grave. (T: Mhm, hmm) 
And I don't think they knew that. And as a result, I got worse and I got worse, and 
um, I took a friend back. You see, I'd lived out here in California. um, after I found 
out that I had leukemia, I proceeded to develop a plan to move my family out here. 
(T: Mhm, hmm) And we moved out in approximately November after several trips 
out in the area. The trips were basically to find a doctor (T: Mhm, hmm) and also 
find in a way some kind of a hope. You see, (T: Mhm, hmm) I have this 
conditioned thing about being a fighter. So, on one hand I accept that, (T: Mhm, 
hmm) and on the other hand I was trying to do all I damned well could to live.
T 7:   If it's going to be death, okay, you'll take it. But you're not going to take it 
unnecessarily.
C 8:   No. Not at all.
[Rogers Commentary 2: I like the way I'm being a companion to him, trying to discover 
just how the prospect of death seems to him. I find that important because a client needs 
most to be understood in the darkest portions of his experience.]
C 9:  You know, the thing that uh, you know, after I was sitting in there and I was 
thinking . . . I had really conditioned myself to, to really get ready and find the 
nearest cross and crawl up on that, and I've been doing that since I was seven years 
old, and I'm not sure why.
T 9:  To really crucify yourself, is that what you're saying? Or to be a martyr? I'm not 
really sure . . .
C 10: Oh, I'm not really sure. But I think the activities I was involved in, in terms of 
trans-racial communication, (T: Mhm, hmm) working with groups, and helping 
people (T: Mhm, hmm) I would hope very similar to what people like yourself did. 
(T: Mhm, hmm) Um, always being available for everybody, all the time. (T: Mhm, 
hmm) I think that's being a martyr or (T: Yeah) something. Yeah.
T 10: Putting the other person first.
C 11: For sure. Yeah. Instead of saying, "Hey, there's some time for me." Because you 
see, I worked so hard and so long that it was just really, really difficult for me to 
get used to, you know, being sick, not working' and not being in control (T: Mhm, 
hmm) because I definitely was not in control. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there were a lot 
of things that I did that I am not really very pleased about. (T: Mhm, hmm) But you 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 70
know, after thinking about it for just a little while, or whatever, one of the things I 
miss you know, I guess maybe from not telling people or whatever, about I was ill . 
. . but uh, after I told them, some months later, when I had four weeks to live, I 
didn’t find anybody that allowed me to be desperate, that could understand some of 
the things that I didn't want to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) And that brought on another 
guilt trip. (T: Mhm, hmm) And so now I'm in the process of kind of washing all 
that stuff out.
T 11: Mhm, hmm. Is that part of the hurt? You referred earlier to hurt and I didn't quite 
understand that. (C: Mhm, hmm) I can understand the feeling of desperateness and 
also I can understand how hard it would be to have no one really understand that 
feeling in you.
[Rogers Commentary 3: I can let him feel desperate. Friends and family cannot allow 
this. It's important that someone can really permit it. I also go back to his earlier feeling 
of hurt, I wanted to get a more complete feeling for his inner world but he, as you will 
see, doesn't pick up on this particular portion.]
C 12: I've lost my father-in-law, which was a terrible loss to me, and it was a loss that I 
never could talk to my wife or anybody else about. (T: Hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I 
gave a lot to that family, you know, for five or, I don't know, seven years I guess. 
And when I went back, there were just some things that happened that they showed 
me there wasn't, there wasn't very much of a connection. There wasn't very much 
of a connection between, between all of that love and whatever that I put in, and 
then all of a sudden you know, I became just another uh, you know, I became just 
another black person. I became just another nigger. You know, and I think it's 
important to understand that my wife is you know, is white, German Irish. (T: 
Mhm, hmm. I see.) And I think that's a part of that whole thing. (T: Mhm, hmm. 
Mhm, hmm) Um, when we first married, you know, my father-in-law, we just 
fought tooth and nail, but then after that we loved each other . . . for about six long, 
good, hard years. And basically, he was my only connection and when he died . . . I 
found that there was no support. (T: Mhm, hmm) There was absolutely no support.
T 12: And I, I imagine . . . or perhaps I catch a little bit of resentment, that you really 
poured a lot of love and caring into that family and had gotten some back from 
him, but after his death, none of it paid off for you in any way.
C 13: Right. For sure. Yeah, I think that, you know, what I wanted, what I wanted more 
than anything else, was just to you know, I guess, was love. I guess it was that 
mutualness, you know, what I felt for each of them. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I 
thought that was not only my responsibility, but you know, it was very natural for 
me to care about people (T: Mhm, hmm) that were very close to my wife (T: Mhm, 
hmm) at that time.
T 13: So it hurt not to get that love back. It wasn't mutual.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 71
C 14: Oh yeah. For sure it did.
[Rogers Commentary 4: I always try to sense the feelings just below his words and he 
welcomes that. I try to catch the resentment and the hurt which he hasn't yet voiced very 
clearly.]
C 15: And there were various things that happened in terms of things that were happening 
back east . . . that people were wondering why I had left, you know, a good 
position and all that kind of garbage. And uh, because, see, I hadn't told anybody 
that I had leukemia. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, one thing led to another. And there 
were stories that needed, I think to um, I think every story, every situation needs to 
have two sides. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there was only one side and I was, I was hurt 
because I didn't have my chance. 
T 15: You never were heard.
C 16: Never. And, but at the same time, like, in a way, in a way, I used to feel that I put 
myself in that position. Because no one knew what was happening inside of me, 
you see. Because I had to take care of myself. And I had to be better than 
everybody else. Because I was always told that. You can, in a majority society I 
had to be 100, 200 percent better than my white counterpart (T: Mhm, hmm) or my 
brown counterpart, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever. I had to do that, because that's 
what it took to survive .
T 16: Mhm, hmm. And in striving for that, one reason you really weren't heard was that 
you didn't dare express the person you were, the sick person you were at that time.
C 17: Oh, no. Not at - I really, I really had a fear of that. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) I 
really, I guess, didn't trust some things that were happening, (T: Mhm, hmm) um, 
gee, at a whole global level, you know. But to, then to entrust that kind of 
information (T: Mhm, hmm) to other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was very uneasy 
about that. (T: Frightening) Very uneasy about that. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I did a 
lot of things that I didn't, didn't really want to do (T: Mhm, hmm) because I was 
very desperate. Um, I gave up my, my job and came out here, and I did consultant 
work and so forth, but I had to use a great deal of money for diagnosticians or (T: 
Mhm, hmm) whatever and, and, and all kinds of little gimmicks to keep me alive. 
(T: Mhm, hmm) And consequently I had to borrow money. And when I borrowed 
that money, I didn't borrow it in a way that would say to you like, "Hey, uh, Ted or 
whatever, I need, you know X amount of dollars, you know, and like . . . 'cause I've 
got, I have leukemia," and so forth. I'm scared to death to say that, you know? (T: 
Mhm, hmm) You know, I needed some money because of uh, I think I must have 
invented about ten stories, you know. And I think about it and you know, like, I felt 
real bad about that, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, because like I had 
developed a professional uh, attitude I think, about myself, or at least a kind of . . . 
I had a lot of respect from a lot of people. (T: Mhm, hmm) And you know, I really 
did have that . . . I don’t know if that was love or caring or whatever, but it was 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 72
respect. (T: Yeah) When I got involved with money, the situation with money, I 
had to borrow money and I really couldn't tell. And in a way, you know, I really 
wanted to tell, but I hadn't even told my wife (T: Yeah) and my family. (T: Yeah) 
And I said, okay, well one thing, you know, and I'm gonna, I'm going to be okay, 
and this money is going to be here, and everything else like that and I think that's a 
part of, uh, me that I really, I'm not really sure, that ah, you know, is really 
acceptable you know, because I have to be perfect.
T 17: Yeah. Yeah. So, it's not acceptable even to you to do some of the things you did, 
and also I gather to live behind that facade of falsehood for quite awhile . . . not 
telling anybody what the score was.
C 18: Oh yeah. For sure. Very true. I . . .
[Rogers Commentary 5: The hurt and fear of revealing himself as ill is almost worse than 
the illness]
C 19: That was very difficult. The most difficult part, I think, of (T: Mhm, hmm) I think 
it was the most difficult part of my illness. It was that, "Hey, I couldn't have 
cancer," you know. That's like having V.D. and three kinds of V.D. at the same 
time. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, how do you tell someone, "I have leukemia . . . I 
have less than a year to live, or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . and I need some 
money." (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, it's like when people you know, look at a 
drinking glass or whatever, and you know, after you told them you have cancer . . . 
and they make kind of a . . . shy away from your drinking glasses.
T 19: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. How could you possibly let anybody know where you 
were physically?
[Rogers Commentary 6: One of the hardest things for a dying person is the reaction that 
others have to him. So, when he's talking of death and dying, I feel it's highly important 
to be right with him; to recognize and accept his feelings.]
C 20: I really don't know. I really, you know, I've really tried to debate this thing in 
myself for a long time, and I really, I really don't know how I could have done 
anything any other way, because, you see, it was my character (T: Mhm, hmm) to 
not, I never . . . I'm always there to help other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I wasn't 
there for . . . to say, "Hey, you know, I need some nourishment right now, 
whatever, you know."
T 20: You've just had no experience in being the needy person that needed help and 
needed . . .
C 21: Absolutely. Even when I needed money or whatever, I didn't need money (T: 
Yeah) because of my health. (T: Mhm, hmm) It was because of maybe bad 
business experience or an investment, or something or other . . . and like, for the 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 73
people who trusted that kind of information or whatever . . . like I, you know, well, 
I'm going to deal with that. I'm going to deal with that. But that's not in my 
character, it's never been in my character. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep that 
image. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep the image. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, it cost 
me my family, a couple children, you know. I guess that was the most important 
thing that it cost me. I think the other things are really not that important. But, but 
what it did do, what the leukemia did do . . . it helped me to, to understand that I'm 
just an ordinary human being like everybody else. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) 
You know, and sometimes you know, like, everybody has problems, and so forth, 
but at the same time it was like, it was my character to do that. You know, I 
wouldn't tell them. No. For what?
T 21: But it sounds as though the leukemia helped you to really destroy the notion of you 
as the "image."
C 22: I think, I think it did. I think it did. Finally, at the end it did. I use the end . . . the 
four weeks when I was told I had four weeks to live (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) 
that was the end, at the end of the leukemia. Even though I'm in remission now, (T: 
Mhm, hmm) I don't plan to, I don't . . . you see, I haven't told you that I went to, I 
went for the tests and gave enormous amounts of blood. I don't know where they 
were sending that blood or what they were doing with it. I gave an extraordinary 
amount, but nothing, nothing was coming of that. But you know, one of the things I 
did know that if I went to the hospital, if I did what the doctors said, I'd probably 
die. And it's almost like, you know, when you first become an agnostic in school, 
or whatever, you know, you go through . . . like I went through all this religious 
training, whatever. . . and I said, "I don't think that there's a God." Or, "that isn't 
really important, or whatever." (T: Mhm, hmm) But then at the same time, I hold 
back, you know. And every now and then I give an occasional prayer (T: Right) 
just in case.
T 22: Play it safe.
C 23: For sure. I think that's what I was also doing in terms of the leukemia. I really did. I 
had . . . the logical end to leukemia that my uncle and cousin had had before me 
was to die. (T: Mhm, hmm) Was to die. And now I think I know some things about 
that, though, that you don't have to die. Because it wasn't until I saw everybody 
throwing leaves and things on my grave that I really understood that I had the 
power to do that, and that, by lying for money, was probably worse for me than . . . 
than the leukemia, I think. (T: Hmm) I don’t know if that makes any sense . . .
T 23: Yeah. It does.
C 24: Now I said it. (laughs)
T 24: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Somehow, what I get out of it is that being kind of false 
to yourself really was more of a burden to you, causes you more concern, than the 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 74
fact that you had leukemia.
C 25: Oh, for sure. For sure.
[Rogers Commentary 7: I think this is the first time he voices a feeling that he has not 
realized before. That's a significant point in any first interview.]
C 26: The other thing was that I was about ready to leave my children, you know, very 
young, beautiful children . . . children that I'd brought into the world to do the same 
kind of, kind of thing that I was doing, you know . . . to take the world on their 
back (T: Mhm, hmm) and change things. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, and now that 
helped me now with my kids in the sense of I don't think I want to raise my 
children like that.
T 26: Mhm, hmm. You don't want them to carry the kind of burden and image that you 
carried.
C 27: No. Not at all. (T: Mhm, hmm) Not because they're part Indian. Not because they're 
part black. Or not because they're third world or whatever. They don't have to carry 
that burden of trying to change and always being the recipient of certain policies 
and things like that and always being controlled. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And 
I never really, it made me feel apart . . . because I don't know if my second grade 
teacher thought they were doing me a favor by telling me I was a credit to my race, 
(T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) but then . . . they certainly did, and I didn't feel good 
about it then. (T:  Mhm, hmm) (Sigh) That's a start. (T: Mhm, hmm)
[Rogers Commentary 8: He has come to the end of his rehearsed part and now he is in 
new territory. I'm comfortable with the silence and I'm eager to see where he goes next. 
It's his choice.]
C 28: And I remember talking to a person when I came down. I'd just discovered I was in 
remission, and I was hobbling on a cane, and so forth, and God, the first thing I did 
down here was to take a motorcycle ride. Now, for me, that was radical. (T: Mhm, 
hmm) For me, that was extremely radical, but it was fun (T: Mhm, hmm) you 
know, and it was one of the first fun things that I did. (T: Mhm, hmm) Since I was 
ill, you know, because on top of having the leukemia I was fighting a divorce and 
having my property ripped away from me, you know, and having married into a 
family, and a family that was a different race than I was, and I learned later, as my 
wife told me that she didn't know that a whole community wanted to divorce. (T: 
Laughs) Like they were married. And I was hurt by that too. (T: Mhm, hmm. 
Mhm, hmm) You know, how very good, (T: Mhm, hmm) Christian, (T: Mhm, 
hmm) upstanding people (T: Mhm, hmm) can make some pretty serious judgments 
without knowing you know, the whole story.
T 28: And I catch a note of bitterness there. A feeling that they really make judgments 
without, without knowing the picture.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 75
C 29: For sure. For sure. Well, the thing that was incredible was that I didn't . . . forgot 
about, I guess is that to understand, that you know, . . . I forgot for maybe a couple 
of years - Now, I'm going to oversimplify this next thing (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . but I 
forgot that I was black, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) in that family, in that 
community, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, you see. (T: Mhm, hmm) And then I 
quickly learned that I . . .
T 29: And then you were reminded all over again.
C 30: Oh, for sure. For sure. And I think that also caused a lot of bitterness or whatever. 
(R Mhm, hmm) And that kind of stuff I want to get out of me. (T: Mhm, hmm. 
Mhm, hmm) You know, I can't deal with that . . . someone else's trip on me. 
Because I really don't hate anybody for that or whatever. A lot of the things I've 
brought on myself. But at the same time, I think I really do have the right at that 
time to have been desperate.
T 30: Yeah.
C 31: And I didn't really understand that.
[Rogers Commentary 9: This is a real step in self-acceptance: the acceptance of himself 
as a desperate person.]
C 32: It was just, you know, hey it was so bad, it got so bad . . . this whole trip of 
leukemia . . . and lying and things like that or whatever, that I don't know. I 
thought, "Well, if I can just get ahead a little bit, and make enough money to pay 
off all those people or whatever, or, and even in my will and with my insurance" 
(T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, I made sure that all of the people were 
going to be paid or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) but, you know. I still wasn't, it still 
wasn't acceptable to me for some reason . . . I didn't want to go out owing anybody 
or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, because that wasn't, wouldn't be the American thing 
to do, I guess at that time.
T 32: That wouldn't be living up to the standards you've set for yourself and other people 
have set for you.
C 33: Oh. Yeah. For sure. And like, I'm a little tired of those standards. (T: Mhm, hmm) 
I'm really a little tired (T: Mhm, hmm) of those standards. And I basically think 
that the kind of things that um, . . . me and what I'm into, and what turns me on . . . 
is good for me. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I don't really know why I went into 
remission. You know, I have some feelings about that . . . you know, personal, 
religious, whatever. But I think a great part of that had something to do with 
deciding that I wanted to live.
T 33: Mhm, hmm. Perhaps, sounds as though you're saying several things here, that 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 76
perhaps deciding you wanted to live made a real difference. And also deciding that 
what you were experiencing as your needs and your wants and so on, really had 
some validity.
C 34: Yeah. It's really good to hear you say that. Because I really feel that. Because what 
I did I think was . . .
[Rogers Commentary 10: It is so good to feel understood. It's releasing. It shows the 
value of really getting inside the client's world and understanding it and communicating 
that understanding to the client.]
-
[Rogers Commentary 11: Little by little he is experiencing his bitterness, and his real 
desperation.]
C 37: My phone bill had to be about $1,500 a month you know, because I was so worried 
about (T: Mhm, hmm) the children, you know.
T 37: Mhm, hmm. So that was a big, heavy burden too, then huh?
C 38: Oh, yeah. Yeah, it really was pretty heavy. It was pretty heavy.
[Rogers Commentary 12: This is the first comfortable pause. I feel he is kind of catching 
up with himself and with the feelings he has voiced.]
End of Part 1 (End of first reel of the film) 
T 38: Life has been a very fluctuating up and down, kind of
C 39: For sure. But the leukemia took me away from Michigan, which I have . . . oh, 
bless somebody for that. And if you know, I only live a couple of more months, or 
whatever, it's a lot better (T: Mhm, hmm) than living under uh, constant stress (T: 
Mhm, hmm) you know of worrying about not being accepted, or not being 
accepted.
T 39: But that's one good thing that the leukemia did for you.
C 40: Yeah. It really was. Because I got a divorce out of it. My goodness, I got to 
California. Um, and I really mean that.
[Rogers Commentary 13: Previously, the divorce was a hurt. Here it sounds more like a 
blessing. I wish to follow and be with each feeling as it arises no matter how ephemeral it 
may be.]
C 41: But even when I say it, you know, there's . . . it was a rough, scratchy, scratchy 
road . . . and you know, it's extremely difficult for me to talk about it now. (T: 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 77
Mhm, hmm) It really is .
[Rogers Commentary 14: Notice how his speech has slowed down. It shows he's working 
on himself. A client's whole speech pattern changes when he's exploring difficult new 
terrain.]
C 42: In getting all those bad things out, I'm not sure in terms of how to deal (T: Mhm, 
hmm) yet, or whatever. And I'm really not sure. But there are some you know, 
some things you know, like, I've really got to come to grips with it. "Well, finally," 
you know. Because they're still, you know, when I talk to my wife from 3,000 
miles away and she tells me about what her mother thinks and all sorts of other 
things, or whatever, I get sick. It happened yeah . . . it happened the other day. She 
called and everything was really great and then she'd begin to talk about a lot of 
other people, and what their attitudes and what their opinions was. That night I got 
very little sleep and was ready to go back to the hospital and was ready to have 
leukemia too. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was ready. You know?
T 42: So you feel as though in some sense you prepare the readiness for the illness, or 
you, are taking in something from outside; it makes you ready to have it.
C 43: It seems like it. You know, I didn't believe that. I didn't believe that statement that 
you just made, some time ago, (T: Mhm, hmm) but I believe it now. (T: Mhm, 
hmm) I believe it.
[Rogers Commentary 15: A fascinating awareness of the psychological source of his 
symptoms.]
C 44: You know, I recall when I went back, and, and, and um, for the first time, my 
parents had learned that I had leukemia. You know, what do you say to your 
mother? What do you say to your father? I remember I got a phone call. And I was 
staying at my wife's house where we were going, keep in mind now, we were going 
through a divorce, the whole bit, and were, uh celebrating my children's birthday at 
the same time. My mother calls. "We're coming over." Nobody at the house. All of 
a sudden I lose my . . . my vision goes. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, that was one of 
the symptoms (T: Mhm, hmm) of leukemia. And uh, and, it scare-, it scared the 
hell out of me (T: Mhm, hmm) like I really wanted to run. But I couldn't run, I 
couldn't see. (T: Couldn't see.) And um, it was only when I got back to California 
that I tried to put that together, you know (T: Mhm, hmm) of what happened when 
(T: Mhm, hmm) in terms of you know, the paralysis that I had in terms of my legs. 
It's incredible, it really seemed like somehow, somehow I've got control of that, in 
some way but I mean I'm not really sure. But I'm convinced that I have control. (T: 
Mhm, hmm) But I'm not sure how. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 44: I gather you feel that where before these things happened to you because of what 
happened to you from the outside, now you are beginning to feel control over it 
yourself . . . from the inside. Is that, is that part of what you're saying?
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 78
C 45: I think that's what I'm saying.
[Rogers Commentary 16: This raises the whole question of what is illness? In what sense 
is it psychological and what sense is it physical? I can only go with the psychological 
reality as he presents it to me.]
C 46: When I'm positive and when I’m doing things that I enjoy, I don't have symptoms 
(T: Mhm, hmm) anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't have symptoms. And I don't you 
know, like, when I came down here, the doctors wanted me to have transfusions 
and things like that, you know, and I remember one doctor saying to me, "I don't 
know really who's got you into playing this tennis and all that, or whatever, but you 
really need to come in here and have a transfusion." I said, "For what? I'm doing 
okay." "To be on the safe side." You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) That's . . . well, I 
won't say what that is. (Rogers laughs) But, you know, like, to some extent though, 
that confirms some things to me about not trusting doctors to take care of myself. 
(T: Mhm, hmm) I'm talking about the leukemia. (T: Yeah) I'm certainly not trying 
to indict all doctors or the medical profession (T: Sure) by what happened to me, 
(T: Mhm, hmm) you know, I think, I hope, in some way that other people who 
have life-threatening illnesses can deal with it because I think I have, and I do have 
that control. And like, since I was 7, to some extent, when I went down in that 
basement and turned that light off, or whatever, and I shut the outside world off . . . 
or whatever, somehow I've lost that . . . because somehow in the process of 
becoming educated and socialized, and whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) I 
let other people control what I wanted and what I wanted to do. And I really . . . I 
did. That was a . . . Jesus, that was a, yeah, well, okay.
T 46: That has a lot of meaning to me, and I want to make sure I'm getting it straight. 
Down in that basement as a 7-year old with the lights out . . . you were really 
finding yourself and, I gather, trusting yourself. (C: Mhm, hmm) And then life was, 
said to you, "No, no, don't do that. We have the standards for you. Live up to our 
expectations. You've got to be the image. You've got to be just right. And 
everything." And now you are gradually recapturing what you felt as a 7-year old.
C 47: I believe that to be true. Because even though that you know, the responsibility, 
you know, it was like something inside of me could touch something that wasn't 
seen . . . when I was seven. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I can't remember 
what the book was that Young wrote, or whatever. (T: Mhm, hmm) But it had an 
extraordinary effect on me, this seven- year-old, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) You 
know, I started writing poetry. My first poem. But I guess I did lose it. I did lose it. 
Like I still had it, but all this garbage about me being . . .
T 47: It was well buried?
C 48: Yeah. Yeah. And then other people were shaping me up by saying, well, you know, 
"You're really good if you do it this way, or whatever."
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 79
T 48: "You're a credit to your race."
C 49: Oh, yeah. "You're extraordinary. You're a credit to your race." You know, and, I 
don't know. Maybe they meant very well, or whatever, but it didn't do the job. It 
didn't do the job, you know, because in a way, by accepting that kind of praise, and 
their kind of . . . buying into their kind of system, or whatever, like, I gave up 
something that I knew already at 7 years old.
T 49: And that something, as I get it, is you were giving up something of yourself.
C 50: Yeah. I've . . . sounds good. Yeah, I did. I did.
[Rogers Commentary 17: This really touches him. He’s letting it sink in. He's 
experiencing his loss of self. This is the very heart of therapy. When I can provide a 
climate in which the client can experience his buried feelings rather than describe them 
or be told about them, it has a much more powerful and enduring effect.]
C 51: You know, maybe I'd have been better off if I'd just gone on and lived my life 
rather than try to live other people's lives or whatever, you know. But I gave up 
being happy myself. You know, I didn't expect you know, I guess I didn't expect 
myself to be happy, or to really maybe deserve happiness, or something.
T 51: Sounds like you wanted so much to help people, that ah helping yourself didn't fit 
into that picture at all.
C 52: Not at all. Not at all. There was enough to do without worrying about your own (T: 
Mhm, hmm) little problems and things like that (T: Mhm, hmm) at that time, so I 
said to myself then, you know? Oh, yeah. A lot of things are racing through my 
mind as we talk and, but there are certain things that go through this whole thing 
that I pick out in terms of when I was seven, and those are just really important 
times for me, you know. They were important times in terms of when I was alone, 
and when I was sure, and when I felt good and I felt a part of the you know, the 
stars, the universe. I really did feel that. You know, I remember I used to go out 
when I was 7, 8, 9 years old . . . three or four o'clock in the morning, look up in 
that beautiful sky and see those stars (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm) 
and I'd say, "That's mine over there and I'm going to be there." And I felt good. I 
felt I don't know, in a sense integrated, more integrated than after . . . and as I 
continued (T: Mhm, hmm) to do this and fill out the forms for a scholarship, or 
things like that, I lost it. I really lost it.
T 52: At seven, you were really a part of the universe and you knew it.
C 53: That's what I thought. But you know, what does a 7 year old know, you know, I 
don't know.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 80
[Rogers Commentary 18: This has been a marvelous picture of the wholeness of the child 
and it's description by society. I'm trying as in all my therapy to help him get back to the 
kind of realness he had as a child.]
C 54: I think I did. Yes, I knew it. I knew it because I knew, because I was always drawn 
to the stars, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) It wasn't anything like my parents would 
wake me up in the middle of the night, or whatever, I woke up; I don't know why.
T 54: It was something that you wanted to do. It was something you had a view. Not 
because somebody else said, "Hey you should be interested in the stars or 
something like that."
C 55: For sure. For sure. And I was, I think at that time I was really the best person that I 
could be. And you know, I guess, for some reason, I don't want to heap it on 
everybody else you know, but I was just taught, conditioned or something that . . . 
to not trust that anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) To . . . you know. (T: Uh, huh) It's like 
those things when you're young you hold onto or whatever.
T 55: "But then, that's just childish. That's just . . . "
C 56: Right. Right. Yeah.
T 56: "Don't trust that stuff." (C: Mhm, hmm) "They're telling you what's right." (C: 
Yeah.)
C 57: Yeah, yeah. I've really suppressed . . . I guess a hell of a lot of anger. 'Cause you 
know, when you said that, you know, I felt you know, like . . . you know, I think of 
all kind of words now.
[Rogers Commentary 19: Speaking in society's voice when I said, "Oh that's just 
childishness, they're telling you what is right." There's something intuitive on my part but 
it released his anger. I like to follow my intuition and I've learned to trust it.]
C 58: Really for sure. You’re a minority . . . and in terms of a minority within a minority 
within a minority. Like mother's Osage. She's part Indian, (T: Mhm, hmm) her 
family . . . that history. (T: Mhm, hmm) Father a descendant of black slaves. (T: 
Mhm, hmm) You know? And then being picked out, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) 
Because that's what it was, you know, 'cause I knew what was happening to other 
people in the class, whether they were white or black or whatever. But it was . . . 
you know, but I always really understood that I had to be 200 percent better than 
everybody else so I'd achieve. I almost killed myself playing football because I 
wanted to be the littlest superstar, whatever that means. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, 
hmm) It's crazy things. You know, it was that competitiveness, or whatever, you 
know. And it was that I wouldn't have anything if I didn't compete and if I didn't do 
it like, you know, somebody else told me to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) I guess.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 81
T 58: So those standards and what they did to you really, really dominated your life, if I 
get it right.
C 59: I think so. I really think so. I, I uh, my reference point became . . . and I guess I 
bought into that. You know, I really bought into that. And I really, it really seems 
foreign to me now. It seems as foreign, I think, as leukemia, you know. (T: Mhm, 
hmm) You know I've . . . it really does, you know.
T 59: Yeah. One way of putting it is I feel you are saying, "Damn it, that seven year old 
was more right than all that's gone on in between."
C 60: Yeah. Yeah. And maybe trying to get back to that, and whatever, and now and uh, 
you know, I just wonder how, how that person at 7 would have been dealing with 
the leukemia and all those other problems now. (T: Mhm, hmm) It would have been 
interesting, I think. Probably would've handled it much better. (T: Mhm, hmm. 
Mhm, hmm) (Pause 7 seconds) (Laughs) Feel some kind of release. I don't know.
[Rogers Commentary 20: Notice how his voice has slowed, become more thoughtful and 
calm. He's getting closer to himself by revealing some of himself. And it feels good.]
C 61: I told a lot of people you know, about um, about me. You know, and something that 
came out you know, and that other part of me may be . . . I'm really wondering 
about trusting too, right now. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know (T: Mhm, hmm) 'cause 
I've trusted a lot of other people, too. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 61: And so you're wondering, "Yeah, but can I trust him?"
C 62: Hmm. Well . . .
T 62: Maybe part of that reason is you feel, "My God, I've told him a lot. I've trusted him. 
Have I trusted him too much?"
C 63: Sure. Well, I guess I'm just going to have to deal with it in terms of do I trust myself 
to tell you. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, but I do have that, you know. I have that 
history. (Laughs)
[Rogers Commentary 21: Is it safe to trust me with this more vulnerable part of himself? 
Clients often have such doubts and I respond in a way which helps him to realize that I 
recognize and accept that question.]
C 64: You know, . . . but I've really been you know, like a lot of other people, like a lot of 
other people, you know, or whatever. But I've learned so many things from this, 
this whole thing, or whatever, you know. And even just sitting here and talking 
with you, whether you're Carl Rogers or Jesus Christ or whatever, you know . . .
T 64: Or Joe Doakes.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 82
C 65: Or whomever, you know, it's a, still it's a very difficult thing for me to . . .
T 65: Yeah. Yeah.
C 66: And I don't know if I just haven't allowed myself to be open, you know, and to be 
needy or whatever. But is that junk? That "credit to . . ." You know, that really 
makes me mad. That really made me mad. I mean, I keep, in mind as I'm talking, it 
keeps coming back to me, you know. "Credit to my race, to my race." I remember 
that teacher so well, with big boobs, and she put my head right in them and said I 
was a credit to her race. And you know, that . . . oh, that burned me up.
T 66: So as you get deeper into that feeling it isn't just that you, earlier, you said you 
wondered if it was wise of her to do that. Now you know, "Damn it, I'm really 
angry at her for doing that to me."
C 67: Yeah. And I'm even more angrier when I see it happening all the time. And I don't 
want it to happen to my kids. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I didn't really want my kids to 
be a credit to their race. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) And I know that now. Getting 
militant. (Laughter)(Pause 6 seconds)(Sigh)
[Rogers Commentary 22: He finds it very hard to experience his anger. He only talks 
about it rather coolly. The sigh though, is one of real letting down. A relaxing, a trusting. 
We really are in relationship.]
T 67: Our time's about up and I don't know if there’s more you want to say now for 
today, okay. Or if not, we can call it quits for today.
C 68: Well I'd like to be able to tell you something.
T 68: All right.
C 69: That is going to make me feel good. That is going to continue to have me feel 
positive about myself and to grow and to be nourished or whatever, but I'm really 
not sure what to say. You know, but I really want to do that, so that I can continue 
to live, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) That's important to me, and so (T: 
Mhm, hmm) um, but it's just not coming. But I think I really want to say that and 
be comfortable in saying, you know, "I got raked over the coals and I resent it and 
I'm mad and I'm angry and I need to get that to be angry (T: Okay) You know. (T: 
Mhm, hmm)
T 69: "Okay. I was really screwed by a lot of people, and I have reason to be angry, and I 
am angry, and I need to say that." I can hear the anger in there.
C 70: Yeah. But you know how I haven't said it yet, though, you know. I really haven't. 
You know, I think it um, I think it's just a part of being civilized maybe.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 83
T 70: Mhm, hmm. You're talking about it in a very civilized fashion. (C: Right) Living up 
to those standards.
C 71: Yeah. Which I'd like to just go back and kick some butts, I think. (Sigh) Well, 
enough of the militancy.
T 71: Okay? Shall we call it quits for today?
C 72: Yeah. I think so.
T 72: Alright good. See you tomorrow.
[Rogers Commentary 23: He has revealed more of himself than he expected to. He's 
going from a presentation of himself to exploring himself. From talking politely to talking 
honestly about anger. I believe this has happened because I've followed every feeling I 
could even when he seems to be scattered, to be talking about several different things, 
I've tried to stay with and respond to the most central of his feelings. I feel like we've 
made a start. On a more intellectual level, this session provides dramatic evidence of the 
theory that the child is open to all experiencing. That he or she feels the locus of 
evaluation is in the self. Then the family, the educational system and the culture pound 
home the lesson, "Don't believe in your own experience but learn to live by others' 
expectations. Then you'll be rewarded by love." Therapy means slowly discarding those 
introjections and gradually recapturing the person as he was in his childhood.]
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 84
This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be 
sold. 
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the 
client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
Carl Rogers Counsels an Individual on Anger and Hurt (Film)  (Code name-Dione)
Second Interview -- 1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on anger 
and hurt [Film]. American Personnel and Guidance Association.]
[Rogers: This is the second interview with a young man who reports he has leukemia, but 
is in a state of remission.  In his first interview he realized that the self he had at age 7, was 
a very precious self and that social expectations caused him to lose it.  He had also 
approached the feelings of anger he has felt about what has been done to this self and to 
him.  But he has not yet expressed his anger.  Now the second sessions begins.]
T1:
O.K. Where do you want to start this morning? 
C2:
Uh, I don't know.  I wa ... I was thinking that when we ... when we talked earlier 
about the, the anger ... (T: Mmm.)  I've been thinking a great deal about that.
T2:
I've thought a lot about what you had to say about that.
C3:
Right, you know, and I'm not sure that, uh, that I really don't want to be angry, you 
know, and I'm not sure if anger ... being angry now, is a part of the process and I've 
got to do that, but I'd like to ... I guess my uh ... I guess my mind uh academically or 
something, you know, and something other than emotion or whatever, like, would 
like to tell me that, uh, I'd like to uh ... to not be angry and to skip over that part, if 
that's a part of the process, you know?  But I'm not sure I can do that (small laugh), 
you know.
T3:
Your mind says sort of, "Oh, cool it.  Don't ... don't get into uh, such strong emo-
tion".
C4:
For sure.  It almost seems like that ... that uh whatever is happening in my 
environment or whatever happened in my environment is pulling me into again uh, 
that kind of a trap ... that kind of a system that I don't particularly care ... er, er, you 
know, if you know what I mean.
T4:
Mmm. I think I get that:  that your ... your mind is taking the place of the system in 
saying now, uh, "Play it right.  Do the right ... do the proper thing".  
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 85
C5:
Right.
T5:
But some other part of you is saying, "Yeah, but there's some anger there". 
C6:
For sure. For sure.
T6:
There's some real anger there. 
C7:
Right.  It's ... it's almost like in this country ... and, and I've always  felt like this ... 
you only have about two options, you know, when you deal with race ... you either 
have to be ... you're either a racist or you're an anti-racist. (T: Mmm.)  And that 
doesn't really seem to be the kind of thing that I'm, you know ....  I don't really care 
to be an anti-racist, if you know what I mean (T: Mmm.) anymore. Uh, and I don't 
wanna be a reflection of any other ... of any other larger society at all. (T: Mmm.) I 
really don't want to ...
T7:
You'd like to get in touch with what's going on in you. 
C8:
For sure.
T8:
Not ... not some label or other. 
C9:
For sure.  I think that I could probably trust that a lot better than, than, than trusting 
what's happening or what has happened. (T: Mmm.)  And, um, and when I think 
about that ... when I think about all of that, you know, uh, the things that we talked 
about ... I, I, I think that, um, that's worse than the leukemia.
T9:      Uh, uh-huh.
C10: You know? I know that may sound very strange or whatever, but a lot of things have 
been strange 
T10: Mmm. Mmm.
C11: You know, since this time; and, and what has happened to me didn't just start when I 
found out that I, you know, was going to die. (T: Mmm.) Kind of thing.
T11: Let me see if I understand that.  That you feel as though, um, what the culture and 
people and so on have ... have done to you ... that's really caused you more suffering 
than the leukemia.   Is that what you're saying?  
C12: I think so. (T: Mmm.)  I think so.  And to some extent that ... that would ...  that is 
mild ... like, for instance, you know, you ... I don't know what would have happened 
if I had died or if I will or whatever, but I certainly know what's happening now and 
what happened. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 86
T12: Mmm.
C13: You see. 
T13: Mmm.
C14: And to some extent that ... that kind of leukemia, that kind of deterioration of the 
body is the same kind of thing that happened to my mind.  (T: Mmm.)  And um ... 
(T: Mmm.) You know, it’s ...
T14: So really, what the culture did to you was give you a cancer of the mind.
C15: Yeah. I, I, I, I really ... I think, I really want to say that and I really want to, um, and I 
believe it, you know, and I guess that part of me that's, that's my culture or is a part 
of the total, ... is saying that it's not all that good to be angry, you know, because 
militancy is frowned upon or whatever, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm.)  And I 
guess I'm using mili- militant in my sense because of ... it's, it's just traditionally, you 
know, when blacks become angry they're, they're not angry ... they're militant. (T: 
Mmm.)  You know what I mean (slight laughter)?
T15: I know.  Another label. 
C16: Mmm. For sure, for sure, for sure. Yeah.  And I ... and there's nobody that I can put 
my finger on, you know ... that person that started the whole thing ... that process, 
you know, because that would probably be a lot better for me, you know, then I 
probably would, would try to, to do ... to do that person in.
T16: Yeah ... If you could ... (C: You know?) If you could pin it on one person, then your 
rage would be justified and you could really get after that person.
C17: Mmm.  But how, you know ... but how do you blame somebody else who's sick?  (T: 
Mmm.) You know?  And I think that people that do that to other people, or at least -
when it was done to me, um ... they're really sick, you know.  And here I am, you 
know, trying to ... you know, I don't know if it was forgiving, I don't know if I'm 
sounding  confused or  whatever,  maybe,  you  know, but  trying  to  accept  their 
sickness, you know. 
T17: Mmm.
C18: And at the same time, you know, I really haven't had the opportunity of letting 
anybody accept mine. 
T18: Mmm.
C19: Or maybe I haven't given it to them, but ...
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 87
T19: Yeah, maybe you haven't given it to them. 
C20: Right.
T20: That's what I sense is going on now ...  that you feel "there's so many reasons why I 
really shouldn't express my anger.  I'll, I'll talk about all those reasons". 
C21: Yeah (small laugh), for sure.  I don't know really, you know.  Maybe I'll just be 
angry one day (small laugh) and maybe I'll really feel better or whatever, you know, 
and, and I ... when I, when I smile, I ... I'm uh, you know, I'm smiling but there’s a 
lot of ... and I'm sure you know that ... there's a lot of anger there. (T: Mmm.) You 
know, but it's not my nature to be angry (T: Mmm.) It's not my nature to be angry, 
but I feel angry.
T21: Yeah. Um, and uh so I hear you explaining and explaining that uh, uh,  "that's not my 
nature to be angry.  It's just that I am angry right now". 
C22: For sure (slight laugh), for sure.  And to try to be angry in a productive ... I don't 
know how you'd be angry in a productive way ... you know, in terms of ...  It's like 
now when I ... when I respond to people, you know ... if, if when you encounter 
people, you know, whether it's in the street, whether it's in a professional situation or 
whatever, you know ...if people send out certain messages and wh ... no matter what 
they're saying or whatever ... there are certain kinds of messages that I'm getting, you 
know.  They're saying that, "hey, you know ... that isn't for me" kind of thing, you 
know.  And that's before, you know, I'd like to work with that, and ride it ... like to 
try to communicate without alienating ... (T: Mmm.) people or whatever, but now, 
you know, I'm ending up saying, you know, like ..."hey, that's a bunch of crap", (T: 
Mmm.) you know. "Don't ... don't, don't tell me about the way that I should do it or, 
or give me all that nonverbal stuff about, um, you saying that I'm OK, but by nonver-
bally saying ... "hey", you know, "you're really not OK", you know.  And I don't 
want to hear that kind of stuff anymore.
T22: I get what you're saying and I also feel quite strongly that I want to say, "it's OK with 
me if you're angry here"...
C23: (Pause) ... But I don't, you know ... it's hard to know how to be angry, you know ... 
hard to ...
T23: Sure, sure, I'm not saying you have to be.  (C: Sure).  I'm just saying it's OK with me. 
C24
Mmm.
T24:   If you feel like being angry, you can be angry.
C25: You really believe that?
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 88
T25:   Damn right. 
    
C26: (12 second pause.) Well. (15 second pause.) (Sigh.) I'm not sure how to respond to 
that at all, you know, because a part of that anger is, you know, the ... the hurt, and 
maybe if I’m... maybe what's happening is that if I'm ... if I become angry and I 
really let it hang out, that I really will see how hurt I am. 
T26: Mmm, mmm.
C27: And um, you know, that just came to me as you were talking.
T27: Mmm, mmm.
C28: That, you know ...
T28: Perhaps at a deeper level you're afraid of the hurt that you may experience if you let 
yourself experience the anger.
C29: For sure.
T29: Mmm.
C30: Really.
T30: Mmm.
C31: (Small laugh. Pause.) Um, whew ... (Pause.) I keep getting these blocks, you know ... 
these, you know ... when I come to something like that, you know, because, you 
know, to me that's a revelation and I'm not really sure that, uh, risking being angry I 
guess ... (T: Mmm.) or something like that, you know.
T31: Mmm.
C32: Losing control, maybe.
T32: Yeah, mmm.
C33: You know?  (Pause.)  Well ... (takes a drink of water).
T33: I really do get that ...  that this ... this realization that, "Maybe what I'm most afraid of 
is the hurt that I might experience", um, makes you more cautious about whether you 
should, whether you should or could really let go of the ... of the anger. 
C34: I really don't know, I think that ...
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 89
T34: It's a risk. 
C35: Right.  And it's, you know ... I hadn't really thought about that before.
T35: Mmm.  It's new. 
C36: Yeah.  It's, uh ... I guess I would be ... and I'd re-really would admit openly that I'm 
hurt.  I, I said that I've been hurt.
T36: Mmm.
C37: And I think, you know, that I, I feel I've been hurt, but to really ... to show that, you 
know ...
T37: To show it and ... I guess to let yourself sort of ... experience it, that ... that, I guess 
would be difficult. 
C38: Yeah, I, I don't know. It ... it's, it, it's as scary, I think, as the possibility of ... that I 
had before ... more than before, about dying, you know.
T38: Mmm. Mmm.
C39: And maybe, you know ... guess I was really scared because of the symptoms, you 
know, of, of, you know ... not being able to walk and not being able to see, and 
things like that, you know.  And having to depend on somebody, you know.  And for 
God's sake, you know ... having to show somebody that I'm ... that I'm hurt.(T: 
Mmm.) And how, you know, how can I trust that to somebody, (T: Mmm) you 
know. Umm ...
T39: Seems like a horribly big risk. 
C40: Yeah, it is (small laugh).  Seems to be getting bigger and bigger as we talk!
T40: Mmm, mmm, mmm. "Suppose I really expose to somebody the fact that I'm deeply, 
deeply hurt".  That in a sense would be comparable to having to be dependent on 
someone when you can't walk or something like that. 
C41: (Smiles and sighs.) Right. (Pause.)  Yeah.  I'd like to just to say it's my ... it’s trying 
my conditioning.  I try not to ... one way out of it ... and, uh (laughs) ...  But that ... 
that isn't really acceptable to me now because I ... I, I, I, I  feel that I ... I feel like ... 
that I have to express that, that hurt or whatever, but you know, I can say that, you 
know, and I know right down here, you know, I'm ... I'm saying that and when I say 
it, you know, it kind of keeps something down here. (Gestures, hand to chest, palm 
down. Laughs.), you know.
T41: Mmm.  You're saying it from here up.  (Gestures, hand at chest, palm down). 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 90
C42: For sure. For sure (small laugh). I don't know how to do that exactly ... whatever ... 
It's like I don't drink a lot, you know, because I don't really want to, uh ... (T: Mmm.) 
... experience that kind of, uh, you know ... alcohol to me is a depressant anyway, 
and um, you know ... that's about the only thing I really like to get out ... to really get 
out, you know, and maybe saying, you know, like I'll love somebody.  "I gave of 
myself".  I did the ... hell ... the best I could, and it wasn't good enough, you know, 
and you know, demand on top of demand and everything like that, you know ...  It's 
just, you know ... Shit ... you know, it's, it's like that I'd like to be able uhh ... and I 
said this here, the other day or when I was talking to you ... that I'd like to be able to, 
to say that ... yeah, "I was screwed over and I got hurt and everything else", like that, 
or whatever, but it's an ... it's almost an admission in a, in a way on another level of, 
of ... of saying that they got the best of me, you know. 
T42: Mmm, mmm, mmm.
C43: And I really don' want ...
T43: Mmm.
C44: You know, I really don't want anybody historically to get, have ... to have gotten the 
best of me ... but they did.  They did.  They beat the hell out of me.
T44: You don't want to say, "I really was defeated at times", and yet that's the truth. 
C45: Mmm. It is. (Sighs.) (Pause.) You know, being ... having it being all right to be 
defeated and be beaten and I don't know if there's any value in, you know ... maybe 
to myself ... admitting it to myself, or whatever, you know, but you know, I ... I'm 
really finding out I got a lot of (laughs), hangups in terms of, in that line that I hadn't 
thought of before, you know ... in terms of, you know, because I don't want to be 
beaten.  (T: Mmm.)  But I was, you know. 
T45: Mmm.
C46: Because I think when you are hurt, that's being beaten except, you know ... 
T46: Mmm, mmm.
C47: And I allowed myself to, and I don't regret caring, and I don't regret loving or 
whatever, but you know ... like I'm a ... I'm a kid, you know, I'm a kid in a way.  I 
like to be loved too; I like to be uh ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) ... some reciprocity.  And 
I'm going to start, I think, expecting that.  You know ... without being cold or 
anything like that.  (T: Mmm.)  But I have to, you know, start getting something 
back in return.
T47: You want love to be mutual. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 91
C48: For sure, for sure. (T: Mmm,hmm.) And I don't want to have, uh get in the situation 
like I'm in now, you know, where I'm afraid to, to, to, show anybody that I am, I'm 
hurt, you know. (T: Mmm,mmm.)  Scared to death ... terrified.
T48: Something really awful about showing ... letting anyone know that "I'm hurt". (C: 
Yeah.)  "I'm hurting". 
C49: Sure, sure.  It's, you know ... it has something to do with being a man and it has 
something to do with ... with the race thing, you know.
T49: Mmm.
C50: It has something to do with the relationship ... 
T50: Mmm.
C51: Maybe the failure of a relationship, uh.  A ... a lot of things, you know ... a father not 
being in the home with his children.
T51: Mmm.
C52: (Pause.)  You know, I really feel like being a victim.
T52: Mmm.
C53: (18 seconds pause. Smiles, takes a drink of water.) I don't know how to get that up at 
all. (Small laugh.)  Every time I get close to that, I take a drink of water! (Laughs.) 
(T: Laughs.) Uh, I don't know if that acts to keep it down there or what.
T53: Maybe ... maybe, maybe that'll keep it from coming up above this level (gestures). 
C54: For sure.  I, I don't know.  See, how it, it really isn't what I want either. You know, I 
want it to get out and stay out, you know.
T54: "I would like to let it out". 
C55: Yeah.  So maybe if you have any (sigh) exorcism type powers or whatever, (T: slight 
laugh.) that, uh ... maybe you can just do that and then I'll be free of that, you know. 
Because that's what it feels like ... it feels like there's something there, you know, that 
I really ... and I've identified it.  I think I've identified it, you know, because I know 
there're some times when there’s such a big lump in my throat, you know, and that I 
explain, I give myself a lot of reasons why I shouldn't be feeling like that, you know.
T55: A big lump of hurt, though. (C: Mmmm.) (15 second pause.) And how to let that hurt 
come out in the open ... how to let it ... emerge and be out here instead of way down 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 92
locked in here. 
C56: Right. (Small laugh.)  Yeah.  You know, I, I, I never believe in cookbook answers to 
anything, even when I cook I don't use a cookbook.  I just don't believe in it. I think, 
but I'd really like to be able for somebody to tell me (T: Mmm) to, you know, maybe 
how to do that in about five minutes (T: Mmm) and be through with it so I can live 
the rest of my life in peace. (T: laughs.)  You know what I mean?
T56: (Laughs.)  Sure.  It'd be awfully nice if somebody could say, "Now, if you do this 
and this, all your hurt will come out and it will be gone forever". 
C57: For sure.
T57: Be great, wouldn't it? 
C58: For sure. (Laughs.)  I have a suspicion that maybe you know some things that I don't 
know. (Laughs.)
T58: (Laughs.) No. 
C59: Mmm.
T59: No, I'm not holding out on you. 
C60: Hey, I, I believe that. I, I ... it feels like I'm holding out on myself ... (T: Mmm.)  You 
know.  But hell, you know.  I don't know.
T60: I think it goes back to some of the things you mentioned.  A man doesn't admit he's 
hurt ... a black man especially doesn't admit that he's been hurt by anything. (C: 
Sure.) Uh, a father doesn't admit he's been hurt by being away from his children. 
Just too many things that say: no, no, no ... don't let it out.  (Pause.)  But inside 
there's the hurt. 
C61: Yeah.
T61: A phrase came to me a minute ago that, “If you could let that out, ...” I don't know 
whether this will ring true to you or not ...   “If you could let that out, it would be the 
Voice of a Victim.”  I don't know if that makes any sense or not. 
C62: Mmm, yeah.  And I don't know what, you know, I don't know if I have any control 
over that, (T: Mmm.) you know, of what, of what ... of what would happen, you 
know.  It's like a friend of mine the other day, who helped me through my illness and 
everything, he says, you know, when I've encountered another person that, you 
know, a very intelligent sort that was talking a bunch of intellectual garbage about 
feelings and things like that ... that I really wa ... wanted to just, to, you know, I 
really saw the ... him ... the society, the culture, right in him, you know.  (T: Mmm, 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 93
mmm.)  And I really wanted to just ... to kind of deck him, you know, and that's 
something that's not uh my nature whatever, but I could just really wonder that ...
T62: Mmm, just like to have socked him. 
C63: Yeah, yeah.  And my friend said, you know, "one of these days", he says, if you ... 
"if you don't get it together" or, or something, he says ... not "that if you don't get it 
together", but he says, "one of these days you're gonna really lose it, you know". 
You know what I mean?  It ... it's that I want to get rid of all that stuff that was done 
to me and not have to hear all that other stuff, (T: Mmm.) or to be able to deal with it 
in a very (T: Mmm) constructive kind of a way, you know.  But still it grinds me 
because of all the other stuff that's happened to me. (T: Mmm.)  And when I see 
other people doing it to other people, or whatever, it grinds me ... it makes me angry, 
you know?  And I would think that in those situations, I've begun to kind of strike 
out, you know, or like you know, protecting somebody else or fighting for somebody 
else or whatever, and like I'm not sure what I did for myself, though, over those years 
that all that happened to me or whatever. (Pause.)   Annnd, if I could cry and have it 
be all right...
T63: That's what I was thinking.  (C: That would be ...)  I was just thinking, if you could 
only cry. 
C64: Yeah.  It would, you know, but that's, that's a trip, you know ... that's a trip like uh...
T64: First place, a man doesn't cry. 
C65: Yeah.  For sure, for sure.  That's a fact.
T65: But I guess you're saying that times you have that lump in your throat and you sure 
as hell feel like crying. 
C66: For sure, for sure. (Pause.)  Uhh, I don't know. (Sighs.)  I don't know.  Maybe going 
to a movie or one of those old, you know, (sighs) movies, dramas, or something like 
that ... 
T66: Tear jerkers? 
C67: Right ...  so I can cry, you know, and have an excuse to cry, you know, but crying for 
myself, I'm not sure that, uh ... I'm just not sure that's going to be constructive, you 
know (laughs).
T67: Mmm, you say you're not sure whether crying for yourself is constructive.  I feel also 
you're afraid of crying for yourself. 
C68: I may be, I may be, because if I feel like crying and I don't, whenever there's some 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 94
things that are, you know ... but you see, that's a part of it too, you know?  It's ... you 
know, and I, and I can't ... I, I hate to keep using these things of, you know, we're just 
being so conditioned not to, you know, from a little thing of, you know, like oh, you 
know, "be little, little men or big boys", or whatever.  "Don't cry", and, and ...
T68: Probably your seven-year-old could cry. 
C69: Yeah, for sure.  I cried, I remember crying, but I cried alone.  I never let anybody see 
me cry, you know?  I wonder how many people have seen me cry! (Laughs.) (T: 
Laughs.) Two or three in the whole world.  It's kind of interesting, you know.  I 
remember living with my ex-wife, or whatever, she cried all the time.  She cried get-
ting up in the morning, and you know, just crying for crying, you know.  I asked her 
sometimes about why she cried, and she just said, "I don't know, just wanted to, felt 
good".  I don't know if that was healthy or whatever, but it probably is a lot more 
healthier than what I did.
T69: Mmm.  It probably is better than never letting anyone see you cry. 
C70: Right.  There's just so many other ways to do it, you know, that I've learned, you 
know, like working hard.  (T: Mmm.)  Not thinking about it, (T: Mmm) you know. 
Not thinking about it.
T70: Just seeing that all the sorrow that you feel for yourself and for what's happened to 
you and all that, uh, "that doesn't really exist".  It's just uh, you're too busy to have 
any thoughts of that. 
C71:  For sure.
T71:  But the sorrow is still there. 
C72: For sure.  Yeah.  And I really don't know how to de ... and I really don't know how to 
deal with that.  I really don't.  I really don't. (Sighs.) You know, just really giving so 
much of yourself and it's really crazy.  Too much. (Sighs).
T72: If you did cry, what would some of the themes of that crying be? 
C73: Well, just you know, all those, you know, hours that I, you know, that I spent away 
from my family and that I gave up my family and didn't see my children grow, you 
know.  I really wanted that to be for some kind of a higher level, some kind of a 
cause, you know.  But not to have that uh, to see anything, any benefit that I did. 
You know, all of that work, I mean, hours and hours and ... but it's just incredible, 
and I think that would be one, you know, I was saying, "Damn it, why in the hell did 
I spend so much time?"  (T: Mmm.) "Why did I spend so much time?".  You know, 
the leukemia, the ... everything that happened to me or whatever would be properly 
deserved if one person's life would have been changed, or something, you know. (T: 
Mmm.)  And like, and maybe, maybe it has or whatever, but, but I think that I, I 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 95
don't trust that ... that it was worth it, you see?
T73
Mmm.  Yeah.  You invested a whole lot of caring, a whole lot of your self, and you 
feel real sorrow that maybe nothing came of that.
C74
Yeah, and I'd also like to uh just kind of cry for my father-in-law too,  who was 
killed before I ... (T: Mmm,mmm, mmm, mmm.) about six months before I got the 
leukemia.  (T: Mmm) I'd like to really tell him that I uh, that I really loved him a 
great deal. 
T74: Mmm ... So you're telling me in place of telling him  and maybe you could even 
speak to him, I don't know.  But at any rate, you really would like to tell him, "I 
loved you, you know that? I loved you". 
C75: Well, I, I really would, you know. Th-thisss situation that we started out ... I was 
married, and we married somebody of a different race, and we fought it out tooth and 
nail or whatever, and but, but yet we loved each other and we fished together and he 
was great with me.  You know, he had a very ... to other people, a very cold way, 
you know, of, you know, "By God, this is the way it's going to be" and so forth.  But 
I saw him when he was hurt too, and um when he was killed in, in 1975, in a, in a 
hunting accident, it just really took all of it, you know.  (T: Mmm, mmm.)  Because 
you see, he helped me to, to try to get out of that stuff.  He's saying, "Hey, what are 
you doing, you know? Do ... what do you really want to do?".  And at the time I 
wanted to, you know, to open my own restaurant or whatever. (T: Mmm.)  And so he 
was going to help me finance that restaurant, you know.  And so a week later he was 
killed.  One week.  And um, and so we were getting so close, but that I really never 
told him that, "Hey Dad, you know, hey Dad, I love you, I really love you".  And we 
told each other, I guess, in some ways or whatever, but it's not the same as saying it, 
you know, as saying, "Dad, I really love you. I really care".
T75: You feel really sad that you never gave him a straight message on that, that "I love 
you". 
C76: For sure, for sure, because he was straighter th ... with me than a lot of people, you 
know. 
T76: Mmm.
C77: And to now to be taken away from all of that, you see, because it's only been, I don't 
know, eight months or so since I ceased all communication with my family, you 
know, family that ... my wife's family that I've loved and I've cared for and that I 
buried my father-in-law and that was it.  That was the ... and then even the family 
began to take on those same things of the culture, you know.
T77: Things began to fall apart for you there, mmm, mmm. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 96
C78: For sure, for sure, you know.  And lately, I don't know, falling apart or at least my 
being able to see that uh that it really wasn't, it wasn't true.  (T: I see.)  It wasn't real, I 
wasn't getting, I wasn't getting anything back, I wasn't getting any nourishment back, 
you know.  (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm) Smiles and polite kisses and things like that, 
you know.  That is, you know, part of the hurt, you know.  I'd rather for somebody to 
say, you know, "I think you're a lousy S.O.B. or whatever", as opposed to saying, 
"Hello, dear, how are you?"  You know, you know?.
T78: Mmm, mmm, mmm.  When the real message perhaps is, "I think you're a lousy 
S.O.B.". 
C79: Right, right, you know.
T79: Mmm.
C80: (25 second pause).  Yeah, so there's, you know, there's a few things.
T80: Part of the sorrow would be for your father-in-law.  You'd really weep for him. 
C81: I ... yeah, I think I would, you know.  And just maybe I still think that I really wish 
that I could, you know, just say, "Hey, you know, you guys, you really don't realize 
what you did to me", you know?  Because for a while, I just, you know, saying, well, 
you know, "racist", "terrible", "blah, blah, blah".  But that doesn't say anything, you 
know, because it doesn't say how I really feel, you know.  (T: I see.)  But they, but it, 
but it ... they wouldn't understand that, they wouldn't understand how a black person 
could be hurt, you know, because if you don't accept a person as human, how can 
you, how can you think about, you know, like ... it's like thinking a dog could be hurt 
of whatever, you know, people that don't have dogs and don't understand them, you 
know?
T81: But you get some satisfaction out of saying, "You people don't realize how much you 
hurt me".  They might  not be able  to hear that  message,  but you'd  get some 
satisfaction out of ... out of expressing that, out of ... out of letting, letting yourself 
know, letting others know that, "God, I've been hurt!" 
C82: Yeah.
T82: "I've been wounded". 
C83: I just don't think I could do that 'cause I just don't think that that that, I just don't 
trust, you know, you know, I wouldn't do it because I just wouldn't want to give them 
the satisfaction, you know.  It's like I feel like, you know, my saying, you know, 
"Maybe that is my feeling".  But I, I have too many times, you know, when you 
know, I opened up a little bit or whatever, and someone says ... (T: Mmm.) ... you 
know, squash!
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 97
T83: So there are probably loads of people you wouldn't dare open up to on that,  but I 
guess you're opening up to me to say, "Yes, but I have been really wounded, badly, 
by a lot of people". 
C84: For sure. Mmm.  I maybe think that you can understand that a little bit in terms of 
about hurt and that, you know, that ... you know, that I, you know, that I'm a person 
and uh, (pause) you know, I'm a person.  And I don't really want that denied to me ... 
(T: Mmm.) you know, ever again. 
T84: Mmm, mmm.
C85: You know. I could really get angry.
T85: Mmm. mmm.
C86: I don't you know, I just ... that's not going to happen to me, you know.  In a way, you 
know, I don't want to love anybody like I did my father-in-law again, and for God's 
sake, you know, that's, that's painful, but I know that's terribly sick too, that you have 
to love, you have to continue to love people.  Or whatever. But at that time, it was 
the only thing that was productive.  It was the only thing that was something that 
was, you know, as Fromm talks about, biophilic.  It was growth; it was nourishing. 
And that was the only thing, and that was just taken away from me, and it was taken 
away from me just ...
T86: Just like that. 
C87: You know, It was just really strange, you know.
T87: So that, that's been a ... a hurt and a shock and makes you feel, "I can't risk myself 
loving somebody else like that because that might disappear some way or other". 
C88: For sure, for sure.  For sure.  I certainly don't want any more in-laws. (Laughs).  Be 
they uh whatever color.  I'm not sure I want them, but now you know ...  And that's ... 
I think that's part of it, you know.  More so than, than the risking loving somebody, 
just because their death ... death I know is inevitable.  But it's that, that other 
collection of things around it, or whatever.  But you know, it's... it’s crazy.
T88: It's what? 
C89: It's crazy to love, you know, it's just like loving a pet rock or something, you know, 
it's nothing.  Nothing, you don't feel.
T89: Mmm. mmm.  "Love goes out from me but nothing comes back". 
C90: Right.  And I'm not so sure that that, that I want that, it to work like that again, you 
know.  And maybe by ... maybe saying that, I don't know, maybe you know, calling, 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 98
say, "Hey, I really was hurt" and everything like that or whatever.  Maybe that would 
be a start or whatever, but I just don't really trust that they really understand that.  (T: 
Mmm) I don't really, really uh ... it took my wife who lived with me for seven years, 
you know, after I left, maybe six, seven months to understand that I was, that I was 
hurt, that I was ... that I was desperate.
T90: You feel there's so little chance of anyone else really understanding you. 
C91: Mmm, that sounds kind of, yeah, well, (small laugh), so little chance for that group 
of people understanding me. (T: OK.)  And I believe it.  I really believe it, you know. 
It would just, it would be like me trying to, uh, to understand or to, to tell Dick Nixon 
or something about my feelings, that I just don't think he could relate to that,you 
know. (T: Mmm.)  And I'm using, and ... and I'm really serious about that example, 
because he's so far away from me and my reality, and that family, you know, I found 
out was so far away from me and my reality that, you know, it was insane, you 
know.  It was really insane, you know.  So I think on one level I feel OK for loving 
them.
T91: You feel...? 
C92: OK for loving them.
T92: I see, mmm, mmm.
C93: But I don't feel OK for sharing any more with them. (T: Mmm.)  And sharing that 
hurt is just, (T: Mmm) you know ... and maybe sharing it with other people would be 
OK.  But I know I'm moving away from the other too, you know, that's really 
important to me right now.  And I don't know ... maybe I won't ... I'm not rushing it, 
it just seems to want to get out and jump out or whatever, but, you know, you know. 
It's clearly must have really gone through ... my body really must have gone through 
some changes or whatever because, you know, something there is just keeping it, 
keeping it down, and I know all those reasons but I can't uh, I can't seem to muster 
that power to ... (T: Mmm.) ... to get it, to get that out, you know, to really, you 
know.
T93: It's still too much locked in. 
C94: Yeah, for sure.  But it really, it really helps, you know, um, 'cause it's, it's, it's just, 
you know ... it's incredible, you know, this is the first time I've talked to anybody 
that, you know, that I haven't really been in control.  To some extent I've really given 
up a lot of control uh ... to you.
T94: Mmm, mmm, sort of letting things loose rather than ... (C: For sure.) ... keeping them 
under your control. 
C95: For sure.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 99
T95: And that's a new experience. 
C96: A very new experience for me.  Very new experience.  And maybe I don't know if 
it's just not, just it's a function, function of that too, you know, or something, you 
know.  Things are rattling around in my head now (laughs), you know.  But all the 
other, it's just bullshit, and like I have been hurt and I really don't want to get 
involved anymore in terms of with people that can't return love and can't accept 
people.  I just don't really want to get involved anymore.  I'm sick and tired ... sick of 
it.
T96: Sounds as though you're more accepting of yourself as a person who is vulnerable, 
who has been hurt, who is hurting, and who wants love ... who doesn't want it all to 
be a one-way street of giving love.  You want love back in return. 
C97: Mmm, mmm.  Yeah.  And I wanna be able to uh, to feel and to, and to cry.  (T: 
Mmm.)  And not to be afraid of crying, and, and not to be afraid of, uh ... I want to 
be able and I'm going to work for that.  I really wanna work for that.  I, I know I do, 
you know, I just have this thing, ah, you know.  If I trust the doctors, I'd have them 
cut 'em, cut me open and get that out, you know, but I don't.  (Laughing.)
T97: (Laughs.) Mmm.
 Probably'd be simpler to have an operation. 
C98: Oh yeah!  (Sighs).  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But I, but do you, do you, do you, do you, do 
you feel that ... you know, like I really wanna, you know, tell you how hurt I am, but 
I'm not, I can't tell you?
T98: I understand that. I ... you're, you're uh, it visualizes in my mind you're walking all 
around the edge of that pit, but you're not really letting yourself down into it; so 
you're letting me know all about it (clears throat), but, but not it. 
C99: Yeah.  For sure.  Yeah.  Don't know how to do that. (T: Mmm.)  You know?
T99: Yeah.  I, I hear you saying, "I really want to get to that, but it will have to be at my 
pace.  I can't ... I can't force it. I can't... but I do want to get to it". 
C100: Yeah.  'Cause I want to get to it really fast, you know, because that's all a part of me 
right now that's really ... I really feel that's sick, that's really the cancer, (T: Mmm) 
you know.  That if I could eliminate that, I could eliminate all the cancer from my 
body. (T: Mmm.)  I really believe it, you know.  And I really blame, I really blame 
the way I lived and the stress and everything else like that on, on on the disease.  I 
really do.
T100: You mean, you blame the disease on all that stress, is what you mean? 
C101: Right, for sure, yeah.  I have it turned around.  For sure.  I do. I do.  And to some 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 100
extent, I blame racism. (T: Mmm, mmm.)  You know, I just don't want to get 
caught up into that anymore, you know, and I want to continue to give, but I don't, 
I, I, I'm just not going to do it the way I did it before.  And uh, I don't know.  May ... 
yelling sometimes you know, like when I came in here, I was thinking about 
yelling, you know, one of those long, big long ... you know.  But I'm not sure that I 
want to do that.  (Smiles.)
T101: You could try it. 
C102: (Laughs.) You know, I don't know, you know (Laughs.)  That wouldn't be cultured. 
T102: (Laughs.) Standards, standards, standards. 
C103: Sure, I mean, I'm really, I was really socialized.
T103: You were brought up right ... weren't you? 
C104: Oh yeah, I was.  I learned all of it ... all of it.
T104: And still in spite of yourself, buy a good deal of it. 
C105: Yeah. Yeah.
T105: You really don't want to, but still you find ... (C: Yeah.) ... you can't do the uncultu-
red thing. 
C106: For sure.  There were standards, I guess, and uh, that are really foreign to me, but 
uh, you know, the, the thing that, you know ... that I thought about you know, and 
like you know, I was like in terms of expressing my anger, whatever, comes out in 
terms of, you know  (sighs), possible obscenity, you know (laughs), you know, like 
calling somebody a bunch of something or whatever would really, you know, I 
don't know what it would do, but you know, I'd really like to do that, you know. 
T106: That helps to explain why I feel you've kept your language more, quite guarded 
here.  I, I, I realize I've used more profanity than you have. (Laughs.) 
C107: (Laughs.)  For sure, you know.  It's not because of, you know, but I don't know, it's 
just a, a part of that, you know, like I was just ...
T107: You'd like to just tell off the bastard! 
C108: Yeah, right, right, right.  For sure. (Laughs.)  Oh my goodness! (Laughs.)
T108: You can't even do that.  (Laughs.) 
C109: (Sighs.) Oh, it's incredible.  I don't know.  Whew! I'm getting warm.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 101
T109: (Laughs.) Both inside and outside
C110: Yes, right, right. I'm getting extremely warm.  Um, yeah, maybe I'll be able to do it 
one day, I guess.  Maybe I'll be able to do it (laughs).  I really haven't used ... but 
see, when I get out of here, I'll use a lot of profanity, you know.  I don't, you know, 
just in terms of, you know, like I ... I, I, I, I think I did, you know, when I was really 
angry talking to my wife and things like that, you  know, where I was just, 
"Goddammit", and all of that, you know, "bastards" and some other things and like, 
you know, I was raised properly, you know (laughs.). Uh, yeah, but I think part of 
that would be a part of expressing my (T: Mmm) feelings and everything like that, 
you know.
T110: It wouldn't come out in nice, polite language. 
C111: No, it wouldn't.  It, it really wouldn't.  It really wouldn't.  To my teachers that I had, 
to the family that I had, uh, to a lot of my colleagues, you know, and others.  And ... 
but I don't know if I really want to tell them, you know, maybe it's just a part of just 
being proud and, and everything else like that, but at least to myself I, I need to get 
it out and openly.
T111: Yeah.  You may not tell it to them face to face, but you need to get it out of yourself 
somehow. 
C112: Mmm. Somehow, yeah, yeah.  Really rotten and I really feel s ... you know, really 
screwed.  I really feel ... (T: Mmm.) ... so badly.
T112: "The bastards really screwed me". 
C113: Yeah, I know.  They ... they got me, you know.  It was just like uh, being part, I 
guess, that had something to do with being in, you know, I guess, you know, I 
just ... I just wipe 'em out, you know, if you don't get them with their bodies you do 
it in their mind, you know, like it happened, you know, and it was ... it was real, you 
know, and you know, to try to describe that hell to somebody is just the, the hardest 
thing, you know.  But it's like, you know, just somebody knocking you down ... (T: 
Mmm.) ... and it's somebody coming and stomping on you and spitting on you and 
everything like that, and like it's just, you know, and just being at ... feeling like 
garbage. 
T113: Mmm, mmm. 
C114: And I have the feeling that people have made me feel like garbage, you know, and 
like ...  you know?  I'm sure that my friends would say, you know, God, I had 
everything. But I didn't have everything.  I didn't have everything.  Certainly didn't 
have that respect as a person.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 102
T114: But there were a lot of people who, though they may or may not have beaten you 
physically, treated you in a way that just trampled on you and beat you up and spit 
on you and made you a nobody, a piece of garbage. 
C115: Right.  And it won't happen again.  Not if I can help it (small laugh).
T115: Mmm.
C116: It's 'cause I'm really tired of fighting.  (T: Mmm.)  Really tired of expending that 
kind of energy. (T: Mmm.)  It really is just, is straining, it's too draining, and like, 
you know, I don't really know what's gonna happen in terms of, you know, how I'm 
going to do that, you know.  Get it out or (sighs) or whatever, but you know, I just 
don't really want to say that I'm hurt or whatever, because that is ... that isn't even 
descriptive (small laugh) enough for what really happened.
T116: Yeah.  To say a word like that or several of the words you've used just isn't at all the 
same as feeling those feelings inside and really feeling them fully. 
C117: It really is, uh, I don't know if you saw "The Excorcist", but it really is, really is, 
you know, that oohf, you know, I remember a scene in that movie where the girl 
who threw up this green slime, you know, and that's really, it's that, you know, it's 
that bad, you know, it's, you know, it's that, it's that bad.  'Cause I know it ... I know 
it now, you know.  It's not a part of me and my body really wants to reject that, but 
how to, how to throw that up is ...
T117: Yeah, how to ... how to vomit up that green slime that's been a part of your 
experience. 
C118: Yeah.  Maybe I'm just afraid I'll look horrible, you know, or, or that I'd look 
horrible, or whatever, expressing that kind of anger, that kind of uh, that kind of 
hurt or whatever.
T118: You wouldn't look civilized; you wouldn't look cultured. 
C119: (Laughs.) I don't, I don't know, you know. (Sighs.)  I don't really know.  But right 
now, the ... more than getting that out, I think the, uh, the overriding thing is that I 
wanna keep at least that control, to control that, for fear of, you see, I don't really 
want to get sick again (T: Mmm, mmm.)  You know, and like I think this, the 
slightest, you know, just by being weak, by submitting to that kind of pain, um, 
somehow bring back my uh ...
T119: You wonder about that ... whether if you, if you let out all the ... all the hell that 
you've experienced inside, it might uh, it might bring back your illness. 
C120: And that doesn't sound logical, does it?  (Laughs.) I know that.  (T: Smiles.)
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 103
T120: O.K. (Laughs.)
C121: Thank you, thank you very much. (Sighs.)  Oh, God.  What a ... mmm. (20 second 
pause).  I don't know.  God, you know, I feel so beaten.  I ... when I feel beaten 
right now, and I'm not sure why, but that in a way the, that I got, uh ... I really got 
something to say and it just, you know, and I know I'd feel better.  But maybe I w-
ouldn't, you know, I really talk ... God, I realize how I'm talking in circles.  I seem 
to be talking in circles.  Does it sound like uh?
T121: No, not quite.  It's more spirals, I think. (C: Laughs.)  Getting, as you say, getting 
very close, you feel, you feel beaten right now as though, if only something could 
come out, you wouldn't feel beaten. 
C122: (Pause) Yeah (sighs)  Think that you know, just ... that turned, that almost turned 
me into something really inhuman.  
T122: Mmm.
C123: I really almost let it turn me into something really inhuman.
T123: It damn near made an animal out of you. 
C124: Damn near, damn near, yeah.  So you see, if uh, I don't want that to happen 
anymore.  At all.  Not gonna do it to me again (laughs).
T124: No. That's very clear. 
C125: No.  I know that doesn't help the other problem, but at least I know that (laughs), 
and I really do know that, you know.  (T: Mmm, mmm.)  Because I don't think 
anybody has a right to do that to anybody.  Nobody ... teacher, wife, husband, 
whatever.  Uh uh, and it, and it really wasn't my fault either and uh, and like I'm not 
the blameless ... I mean, I'm not without any blame or whatever, but you know, you 
know ... just like somebody took a big goddamned tree and just rammed it up ... 
ooh, so, you know? (Sighs.)  Hard to describe, you know, you know?
T125: Took a great big stick and rammed it up your ass ...  Is that what you're saying? 
 
 C126: (Laughs.)  I, I didn't say that.
T126: Is that what you meant? 
C127: That's what I meant.
T127: OK.  That's what I want to know, whether I was catching your meaning correctly. 
C128: Yeah, for sure.  You know, and you know that that probably would be painful. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 104
(Sighs.)
T128: And it's that kind of pain that you've suffered. 
C129: Yeah. (Pause).  You just can't let it ... I just, I just can't let it happen again. (Sighs. 
18 second pause.)  I um really, uh, I just really don't know how to tell you how 
badly I've been hurt, you know.  I really don't.
T129: Goes beyond words. 
C130: Yeah.  But I know, you know, it's there, and maybe I should attend to it a little bit 
more.  But, goddammit, you know, just ooh...
T130: You're feeling some of that hurt now. 
C131: Yeah.  I am.  I was thinking a ... about a wino on a street that continues to drink, 
doesn't have a place to live.  You know I've seen so many people go by, they're the 
kind of person, you know, disgusting, don't want to work or whatever.  But you 
know, I really feel like there may be some reasons. (T: Mmm.)  And I know one 
thing, I'm gonna allow that person to be desperate ...  (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because 
I'm thinking that probably people like that do things out of desperation.  And um, 
'cause I know, you know?   I never really had a drinking problem or anything like 
that, but it's the kind of sensitivity that I've gotten from all of that.
T131: Mmm, mmm.  It seems, it seems to me that you're uh feeling it ... you know what 
it's like to be in desperation and you know what it could drag you to, and so maybe 
that’s what’s happened to some of them.  Something like that. 
C132: For sure.  For sure.  And I think that I ... I think my, my heart goes out to people 
like that, people who can't afford to to do this or whatever, and ... because see, I had 
a lot of money and you know, it all left.  And uh, but in a way I'm happier now, you 
know.  But I really don't know, not sure really where to go next, but I know that I 
don't really want that kind of life anymore.  That I wanna give, I wanna help, and I 
wanna talk to people or whatever, and before I do that, you know, I wanna get my 
thing together, and a part of that is just maybe admitting, you know, and I guess 
maybe admitting that I'm hurt and showing and expressing my hurt or whatever 
will, will reaffirm the fact that I'm a person (T: Mmm, mmm.)  Because apart from 
that, I think showing that is a, you know, pulling myself up too high, (T: Mmm.) 
you know, and that’s what everybody, you know, that's the way everything was.
T132: "I don't, I don't feel it ...  I don't hurt, I'm, I'm fine"... That’s a lot of bullshit. 
C133: For sure.  But at least I'm admitting to you that I'm hurt, you know.
T133: Yeah, that's right, mmm.  And just for a moment there, I felt you really were 
experiencing that too, really feeling that stick shoved up your ass. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 105
C134: Oh, yeah, you know, when I, you know, what is, you know how your natural 
reaction, you know, when you start feeling stuff like that, or at least when I do, I 
just kind of, you know, I've got to put it all out of, out of my mind, bring it down to 
a different level.  And I think that's what I'm doing, I keep doing, you know, when I 
get to the point.  Gotta bring it to a safe level.
T134: Yeah.  That's right.  You get that close, you get that close to the pit and then pull 
away a little. 
C135: (Pause.) For sure.  You, you ... is it all right to have everybody else to blame? 
(Laughs.) (T: laughs.) You know, for your, for your problem, instead of sharing 
some of that.  But I shared, you know, I, I, I think I've really, I shared that, you 
know.
T135: I think ... I think what you're saying is, "I feel as though, dammit, everybody else is 
to blame.  My mind says, Oh, no, you have, you probably have a part in it too, 
but..."  (C: Sure. Sure.) ...your feelings are ... 
C136: Yeah, yeah.  And I guess I hurt myself.  I didn't, other people ...  maybe if I can 
clarify that ... I let myself be hurt. (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, because I just gave 
too much, you know.
T136: Mmm.  Made yourself vulnerable sometimes. 
C137: Really.  And not sometimes ... most of the times.
T137: Most of the times. 
C138: You know, by being, you know, just by being, by sharing, by being there, by 
giving, you know, and really loving.  Because I do have that sense of a total, you 
know, that just, I wanna love, that's my nature. 
T138: Mmm, mmm.
C139: But you know, I, I've really never been this beaten.  I never ... you know, never 
have.
T139: I want to be clear about your meaning.  You've never felt so much of being beaten 
as you do right now?  Is that what you're saying? 
C140: Well, through this whole thing, you know.
T140: Yeah.
C141: Just beaten, you know, just really beaten, and I think that if I show you how much 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 106
I've been beaten or whatever, you know, like I'd probably, you know, become 
nothing in this chair, you know, just ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know?  (Laughs.)
T141: You might practically disappear if you really let me know how hurt and beaten and 
awful you feel. 
C142: Mmm, for sure.  For sure. You know, I could tell you some times I mean that would 
just, you know, maybe blow you away, you know. (T: Mmmm.) ... (Sighs and 
appears on the edge of crying during a 20 second pause.)  Really too much for me.
T142: Hmm? 
C143: It's really too much for me.
T143: Too much.  Mmm. 
C144: I feel like it.
T144: I, I think you feel as though, "I've gone about as far as I can go at this point". 
C145: Yeah.  Mmm, yeah, really. (Laughs.)  When I start smiling, I know I am.
T145: Mmm.  Taking a drink of water. 
C146: For sure. (Laughs.)  Well, you know, but I'm being truthful about it anyway.
T146
Mmm, yeah.  Yeah, I feel, I feel too.  Uh, you've walked around that pit of hurt and 
pain and beaten-ness, and you've, you've felt some of it and uh, and perhaps that's 
as far as you can go right at this moment. 
C147: Yeah.
T147: Even though you know there's more there, you know that you're keeping some of it 
down.  Um and to know those things may be helpful too. 
C148: Yeah.  You see, because I, I can talk about this leukemia and and all this stuff and 
everything like that and ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) well, I guess it's you know...
T148: Fascinating.  And it's easier to talk about leukemia and the possibility of death and 
all that, than it is to talk about all the hurt and awfulness that you've suffered.
C149: Yeah. (Sighs.) Whew, oh, I really, whew, a lot, you know (sighs). I have to stop. 
OK?
T149: OK.  All right, mmm.  Gone about as far as you can go. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 107
C150: Right.
T150: Mmm.  OK, we'll call it quits. 
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 108
FINAL COMMENT BY ROGERS
[Source: Box 137/4, Carl Rogers Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress,  
Washington, DC]
Here is an armor-plated man.  He has been sufficiently hurt that he hides his real 
feelings very deeply.  But in this relationship, the armor begins to crack - just begins to 
crack.  He says, "This is the first time I've ever talked to anybody that I haven't really been 
in control".  So in this understanding climate he lets himself creep closer to the experiencing 
of his feelings.
My image is that he is walking all around his own private slough of despond.  We 
find the upper layer is anger, but further down in the slime are the unspeakable hurts, and 
the feelings of being tramped on, defeated and humiliated.  He gets so close to experiencing 
some of this, that his expressions become eloquent nonverbal communication: "Ooooh!" 
"Whew!  Whew, oh, whew!  I've got to stop".  I feel that at that moment he puts his foot into 
this dreaded pit, but then has to draw back.  I don't regret this.  I regard it as demonstrating 
the wisdom of the client.  He knows where the worst spots are in his experiencing.  He 
knows what he can tolerate.  He has to proceed at his own pace.
Along  the  way  we  see  how  powerful  metaphor  is  in  the  deeper  ranges  of 
psychotherapy.  Metaphor is so much more expressive than an intellectual description...  The 
lump in his throat...  The ability to speak from "up here" and not from "down there"...  The 
goddamn tree stuck up his ass...  The green slime that must be vomited...  They all speak 
vividly of his feelings, without naming those feelings.
From an intellectual and theoretical point of view there are bits that fascinate me.
His introjected self is his cultured self, the quotes "credit to his race".  It has little 
relation to the real feelings in which he could discover his real self.
Another bit.  He reports very convincingly that if he let his feelings all out, it would 
make him sick again.  But hearing those exact words spoken acceptantly by me, makes him 
realize it's a ridiculous view.  To me that's a fascinating interchange.
Here’s another bit.  When I give him full permission to be as angry as he wishes, 
that stops him completely.  Then he can no longer avoid the fact that it is not his anger that 
he is afraid of, but the hurting and vulnerable part of him.
Then there is the mourning which accompanies unexpressed love, the love for his 
father-in-law  which  he  was  never  able  to  communicate.   I  think  he  gained  from 
communicating it to me.
Finally, he makes it very clear that for him there are many more frightening aspects 
of his life than the prospect of death.  Somehow this seems to contain a message for all of 
us.
As for me, I felt very present in the relationship, an understanding companion on this 
trip of exploration which seemed so potentially dangerous to him.  I think it is a good 
example of how I work with an articulate client.
Rogers’ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, Post-Session Commentary, page 109
The Person-Cehtercd Jolmal, Volume l,Issue 3, 1994
Print€d in dle U.S.A. All rishls reserved.
TRANSCRIPT OF THERAPY SESSION
Douglas Bower, Ph.D.
It is our intention m include q demonstation tanscript each issue. The transcript for this
issue is provided by Doug Bower who has availablc several sessions of dffirent therqpists and.
clients. Doug explains this in his intoduction. The client and therapist gave permis:iot1 to
publish the transcipt anonymously. They offer brief comments on the session. JDB
The rcsearch project ftom which this transcript was taken was part of the requirements for a
degree in pastoral counseLing. I wanted to know what client-centered therapy looked like ard to
develop a sense of what it meant to do therapy.
The purpose of the study was to accomplish the following subjective goals for myself: I ) To
better understand the penon-centered theory of Carl Rogers; 2) To be able to articulate my
understanding of thetheory; 3) To begin to develop expertise in theutilization ofthe person-cen-
tered approach; and 4) To be able to draw implications from the person- centered theory for the
ministry of pastoral counseling.
Those therapists who were asked to panicipate had associated with Rogers, regarded them-
selves as being penon- centered practitionen, and were recognized by others as advocates of the
person-centered approach.
We asked: 1) for a tape of a session which the therapist viewed as typical of his or her work;
2) for the therapist to complete a brief questionnaire; 3) that the client also fill out a brief
questionnaire; and 4) that the client complete an abridged form of the Barrett Lrnnard Relation-
ship Inventory.
Six tapes were received witb the accompanying materials. That material was written up and
the verbatim therapy transcript in this paper came from that study.
Requests for reprints should be addressed lo the edilor.
78
Transc ipt of The rapy Ses sion
TRANSCRIPT
T =Therapist and C = Client
Tl: I'm always nervous.I seem to get nervous that th€ tape is sometling that I've got control
of, you know, like its going to be my tape and I think I'm nervous about speaking into
it because usually if it is someone else's then I'm less conscious of it or something you
know.
Cl: Is this yours or is it . . .
T2: Noitsnotmine. ImeanI'mnotgoingto...itsgoingtobetheirs.SohopefullyI'mnot
going to be as nervous as I would have had it been (brief laugh). We could put it where
we couldn't see it.
C2: I don't mind
T3: Yeah, O.K. You don't mind.
C3: Um, I kinda of wanted to start with a part of the dream that I had last night. U m, it's been
grating at me. Every once in a while I have a dream that I fe€l was significant and that .
. . that stick with me and I . . . and I lcrow that I need to know what it meant. This one
part of the dream had a lot of complexities. It re3lly was odd and whal it was was this
car which belongs to a man that I have been dating. I was like looking for it in the dream.
And I couldn't frnd it. And so I thought well he wasn't around. And then all of a sudden
I saw it. It was like in the brush, you know. It was definitely in sight. But it was as if it
was parked so that it wouldn't be in sight. And, you know,I can see the tree limb hanging
down and l'm real intrisued bv it. L . . It definitelv reminds of. . . the fact that this car
doesn'thave head lights right now.
You mean like they are gone. There are holes in there?
No in reality it does but there's something wrong with the headlights.
oh, oh.
Something with the electrical system keeps them working at night
They just don't tum on when you push the butlon.
Yeah.
when you push the button.
Yeah. Which means that he can't drive at night so what he does is that somelimes he
parks his car at the Seven-Eleven and leaves it there and he wouldn't necessarily be there
you know. Let's say he came to visit me. He wouldn't necessarily be there. He left my
place and went someplace else. The Seven-Eleven is like where he leaves his car and
that way it can be watched because they stay open 24 hours.
Well last evening after I left when we were all getdng together, I drove by the
Seven-Eleven to see if his car was there beaause I was interested to know if he was in
town. He is from Cleveland. And I drove by aad the car wasn't there and I remembered
havingathoughtthatmaybehewassomewhereelse.And...ah...ormaybehedidn't
even want me to know lhal he was in town. And I'm pretty sure that's what the dream
has to do with. My concern that he doesn'r want me to know that he's around. Really I
think it goes a little deeper than that. I should say that he doesn't want a relationship like
I do.
Well the thing was hiding. . . the carbeing hidden behind the tree symbolized him hiding
it somewhere.
Yeah. That bothers me (pause) I have different feelings about it.
Yeah, that bothers you that he doesn't want. . . you feel he doesn't . . . .
Well yeah, the relationship . . . O.K. I have to clarify that we have only known each other
for two weeks, O.K. And its probably premature, but we spent a whole lot of lime with
each other in the past week and a half and I was basically on cloud nine about the whole
79
T4:
C4:
T5:
C5:
T6:
C6:
T7:
C7:
T8:
C8:
T9:
C9:
Douglas Bower
thing. And wewere talking about going camping togetler whichjust sounded like a geat
idea- And he seemed to really be enjoying me and I was enjoying him and I was kind of
wondering ge€ when is the honeymoon going to end. But . . . feeling like I was ready to
enjoy it as long as it lasted And then he reported to me that he had ulked to his mom
and dad and they had inquired as to whether he had spent the night at my place or not
and he told them that he had slept on the sofa which indeed he did. But then he was
feelhg like he couldn't do that anymore. And I felt hurt a liftle bit at that. And I'm not
sure . . . I'm not sure, . . . I'm a linle angry, where my anger is directed at. I'm a little
confused . . as to whether it's at his parenls or at him. I think both. Um, probably the
thing that that strikes me the most is thal he would allow his parents to make decisions
for him. I feel like . . . if he genuinely inside feels like its wrong to spend the night, ifhe
feels like he doesn't want to do that because he feels like it's not right, then I can really
accept that. I can acrept and respect it either way, but that doesn't get me angry. It makes
me feel a little disappointed or, you know, "shucks I want you to stay wirh me. I wish
you didn't feel that way." But I feel angrier with him I think because it seems to be tlle
sinration where he doesn't de€p down feel that way. It's more like he feels like he has
to do this for his parents. And I don't know . . . I guess um. . . I was involved in a two
year relationship with a man who couldn't make a commitment to me because he was
Ill3rried to Ns mother. And I'm cautious about getting involved in a situation that's
similar....I se€, there's. . . a difference... if he. . . ifhe really um. . .I think some
people can really feel that they want do something for their parents because their parents
request it and on the other hand, "Gee I got to that because its my parens wishes." See,
I don't operate like that. Not that I haven't in the past. But I don't and . . . I don't know
Tl0: I kinda missed that, you don't op€rate like that . . . you don't do things . . . You don't
like to feel is good to do things you really don't want to do just because they kind of
think you should. Is that . . . .
Cl0: Ah-ha.
Tl1: Ijust kind of. . . .
C11: Um-um.
Tl2: Missed the poinl Yeah, OK.
C12: You know, I guess I fe€l I ne€d to cladfy what I mean. Well, there are things like that
my mom wants me to do like write a thank you lener to somebody if tbey send me
something like a card or a gift or whatever I want to write a thank you letter because I
feel like I want to write a thank you lener. And my relationship with my mom has
improved like. I used to get angry with her "Mom don't tell me to do that. I know to do
that" you know. But now I deal with her a little differently. I say either, you know, "I've
already sent it." But then see it kind of ribs me if I say that to her if I say, "Well, I've
a.lready sent it." "Oh Good, you're such . . .
T13: Ah-ha.
C13: A good girl," or something I feel like, Oh gosh. You know, (shon laugh).
T14: (short laugh).
C 14: That the thing I want to do it because I want to do it not because its the right thing to do
from God Almighty or mother or whomever. And . . . I guess that's that's my experience
with Eddie. I want to feel like he's making this decision because he really feels like . . I
mean I don't really care. I don't want to tell him how to behave. I wanttofeel . -.I want
to love somebody who's making this detision on their own. And t don't feel like he's
doing that and that's making me angry.
T15: Um-um.
Tro nsc ri pt of Th e ra py S e s s i o tl
Cl5: I really, you know, I really feel like de€p down he wants to spend more time with me.
But I could be wrong. Um . . . he shared with me that he doesn't know where our
relationship is going, whether or not we would be able to be married some day. And I
had related to him a little earlier that (inaudible) and he kind of implied that he'd like the
relationship to go in that direction and to just take it like where we're not concemed
about whether or not we have a relationship in the fuhrre, but that we just experience
each other in the now. And that's OK with me as lons as in the now we discuss the future
(laughs).
T16: Um-um.
Cl6: Idon't.. Yeah. And I.. Solthink that's probably my . . . This is an area where I'm not
real sure of myself. Um. I question myself. ls it really OK. . to want to discuss a potential
frrture, you know. I'm not ambivalent on tlat.
Tl7: Ah ha.
Cl7: My experiences with it probably should have taught me by now that often times it doesn't
work out real well to discuss the future. Because I . . . it hasn't been real successful. Um
Tl8: Panicularly in that type ofthing. About that. About future relationships with a man and
woman.
Cl8: Yeah.
Tl9: I think panicularly it it gets sticky here. Something strange happens. I mean,l don't mean
it's not a good thing to do but sometimes guys start to get real nervous when that happens.
(slight laugh) I...
Cl9: Mm-mm.
T20: It happens particularly in those things, yeah . . . .You are probably still going to be
thinking about it anyway, The future, whether you say something about it or not?
C20: Well, you know,like. . . It would be possible to not. Ican see possibly having a different
perspective on relationships. The penpective where you do enjoy them now, and if
something happens more than it will. I tend to think about whether I could or I couldn't
live with this person the rest ofmy life. I tend to think about whether or not - . . you know
. . . um . . . Sometimes I'm unsure. I don't have that many suitors (slight laugh) that there
are that many times anyway. So I don't have much experience to go on. Um . . . My past
relationships are are c harac teri zed by basically two long term relationships, one of which
happened very quickly and the other one I was involved in a relationship thal was on its
way to being a long term relationship when I ended that one to get involved with this
otherman.So...(sigh)....I'mnotsure.tlthinkthadarrivedatthedecisionthatl
was not going to bring up the issue of a long term relationship with him, with Eddie.
And then what happened, we met for a couple of d-cafes (laughs) I think that's going to
be the new American expression. ['ll have a cup ofd-cafe (laughs). When we met for a
cup of coffee, hc told me tlat this conv€rsation witb his mom came up and it set off an
alarm inside of me. And I got anxious and concemed. And he's telling me that he's not
going to be able to spend the night at all. It could have gone in many ways. And I guess
what I'm seeing is that I could have said, "Well OK" and continued to maintain the
relationship as much as possible and nol become concerned . . . I don't know what would
have happened. But that's a thing with me. Before he said that, I felt morecenain even
without speaking.
T2l: Certain? What cenain?
C21: About how he felt about me,
T22: Oh.
C22: And, you know, and and . . . .
T23: OK.
81
L-
82
Douglas Bower
C23: No, it was pretty clear to me that he really enjoyed me.
T24: Yah.
C24: He wanted to spend time with me as much as we both could.
T25: Right
C25: At this point I became uncertain.
T26: Doesn't seem like . . . It's kinda like his feelings for his mother are toward her . . . What
do you think? Or did you begin to feel . . . That's how it stsuck me. That was more this
was more sonrething about her than about ihan about you.
C26: Than about me. Yeah, I understood you. I've wondered about that . . . . Yeah! You know,
probably, yeah, it was morc something about her. And I guess the alarm that it set offin
me was "Uh oh," because my last relationship like I said, this man was married to his
mother and we went out for two years togetber and boiled down to he could not leave
home. And, I just like refused to allow that to happen to me again a.nd um . . and, you
know, this guy . . . Here's a situation where mayb€ its not me. Because the last one wasn't
me. But boy he couldn't leave mom. I mean he couldn't do certain things against mom.
And one ofthe big things between Eddie and I is I'm Catholic and he's not. And despite
the fact that he really admires and likes Catholicism and in some ways thinks that
Catholicism is his religion, I met him at a Catholic club, a Catholic group, despite that
his mom has real reservations about that. And um . . . he feels a strong pull to that and
so I wanbd to clarify how he was feeling about me. I did take it as . . . as it was panly
me. And . . . and se€ this is tlp thing. It's so soon in the relationship that perhaps if we
had gone out for a long time together, you know, he would have felt differently. But see
that's what I'm so afmid I'm allowing to happen, we'll go out for a long time and in fact
he won't want to stay with me - .
T27: He won't . . . because of the mother thing again you mean . . . Yeah.
C27: Yezh. Despite how much in love with me he becomes. And so I just feel the need to
clarify that a lot. I mean John really loves me to death. And I know that, but I, you know,
have pain about that because it doesn't matter how much he loves me. He cannot be with
me. He will not be with me. And ah . . . And so ah, you know, here's a situation where
maybe I'm allowing myself to transfer off this relationship. I don't know. I arn not going
to let this past shit interfere. Because, you know, Eddie is not John. And I'm treating it
similarly. And preventing that from happening, which, you know, I can understand but
...Wellso,..mm-mm,
T28: But I was going to say, if the guy didn't feel he could sleep at your house because his
mothersaidthatlldon'tknowwhat..thatdoessoundsomewhat...ah...alonsthat
lineandI...I...
C28: Mm-mm.
T29: I don't know how common that is among people. But . . .
C29: Yez.h, I guess, you know. I'm not concerned with how comrnon it is or isn't. I'm
conc€rned about how I feel and bow he feels. There's some men . . . I mean I don'tjust
ask men to sleep over. I haven't slept with a man in a long time. We didn't have sex. I
mean in a way, it was fairly ludicrous because (slight laugh), you know, what's the
difference, ifhe comes over and we have, you know, we have sex, versus he comes and
sleeps over and we don't have sex, you know. And so I kind ofthink its a little ludicrous
....Um...Heagrees,buttheothertheotherpartofitis...andl...afterlpursued
it, he said to me that . . . ; one thing said was he didn't want to lie. He didn't know whether
to say this or not, but he guessed he would . . . that he had fantasized us married, you
know. But he also said that from the outset that he didn't think it was going to work. Tbe
way he met me. And, you know, that ofcoune didn't feel real good, but you know he
said he saw problems. Which, you know, I see too. (pause)
Trorrsci of Therapy Session
83
ButI wasn't so interested in exploring the problems at that point until this rhing with his
mom srme up.
T30: Yeah.
C30: I was really into enjoying him very much.
T31: Yeah.
C31: And so I got this message from him, "I don't think I'm going to be spending as much
timewithyou."Ifeellikemaybelneedtoclarifythatwithhimand...um...Oneof
the things he said was that he didnt want to see me hurt. And I think pan of what he was
saying, well I'm pretty sure that he was saying, "I want to have a relationship with you.
I really enjoy you. I like you a lot." And I know he does. And I (slight laugh).
T32: Yeah.
C32: But I think that he might be looking at this more in terms of not enjoying me for now,
butthat I'm going to fall in love with him and he's not going to be here for me. (Inaudible)
And, yeah, if that's true I don't want that. And then, but then I, you know, raised the
whole issue with a girl friend who makes a cornment to me that, "Hey, you know, you
enjoy the relationship tlren." And it makes a lot of sense to me (slight laugb). Because
otherwise you could miss out on a lot of relationships if you are always looking, you
know . . . (sigh) But golly. I rea.lly feel like shit. I don't want to waste my time when
down the road, boom. I mean, you know. I've be€n through. I'm aware that the rea.lity
of the situation is he could tell me he loves and wants to marry me someday and then
leave me and for that matter I could do the same to him, you know. I'm aware of that .
. . . It doesn't matter (slight taugh).
T33: Mm-mm.
C33: . . . . . (long pause) A relly fortunate pan of my experience with him is thar he's the
first man that I really really really enjoyed since my last relationship. And I really felt
like I could tell him that I loved him. (Sofdy crying) And I, you know, quesdon whether
I would ever feel like I wanted to ever say that to somebody agaiD. (Softly crying) That's
real nice. And ah . . . I don't feel like I need to contact John anymore. Which I had called
to contact him every once in a while. (long pause). (Blows nose). It it was rqlly good
to feel, you know, like there was somebody out there that I was in love with. (slight
laugh). Ah . . . (slight laugh). (silence with soft crying).
I have really changed as a result of having that experience. I don't know what's going
to happen with this in the future. It's part of me that I'm going ro have to look at. One
ofthe things that happened was I stopped having that need to have it happen. Even now
. . . and I'm not sure because it's not totally over. And if I felt that I wasn't going to see
him again or something, I would get back that feeling. I don't like walking around with
the fe€ling of being available . . . and it's not so much a feeling of being available, it's
more Imking for available partners. I'd rather go on about my business and have
somebody (laughs). I don't really know how to be single real well. From the time I was
sixtoen to twenty, I had a relationship. Then I didn't for a while, but that was almost like
my second latency, you know, where I had a rea.l close girl friend and didn't really care
about men for awhile. We did things like twelve year-olds do. We looked around and all
but never really thought we'd get any of them, you know. But ah . . . then I had a
reladonship for a white with Tom, until then he left for Chicago which was when I met
John and staned to date him. My tetley tea man.
T34: Your what?
C34: My tetley tea man. I don't know why he (inaudible)
T35: Ah.
C35: Imean...
T36: It sounds like a nickname.
L.
u
Douglas Bower
C36: He left me a note one time, you know, signed your tetley tea man. I . , .
T37: Ah, OK.
C37: (softcrying)Butah...Solreally...Andlhavebeensayingit'sb€enayearforldon't
know how long (taughs). But it probably will be a year forever. No, it's been a year and
a few months now. And that has really been over and it was several months before that
when it really wasn't working; it's be€n a year or so since I've seen bim. And so I have
been single for a year and three months. Which is amazing (slight laugh). I don't really
know how to be single and be comfonably. I haven't been single cornfonably.
I had a great surruner on the beach but I was always interested in, you know, where's lhe
man I'm going to mee t. I knew that was uffealistic because I was at the beach and getting
ready to move to L-A. but I still had this feeling like maybe I can meet somebody whose
looking for a place ro go (slight laugh). Maybe I'll meot somebody from L.A. I walked
around with that more than I would have liked to. I had some good times. I had some
rea.l good times.
I fc€l like crying. . . .It's almost like I equae aloneness with loneliness (pause). But I
did have some good dmes walking up and down the beacb. And I think that's one of lhe
reasons I'm feeling teary. I kind of see a picture of me walking along the beach. And on
the one hand its really good to be alive. Then on the other it's really rotten because your
supposed to walk down the beach with your lover. (laughs) You know? Like they do in
the commercials. So. That was really strange because for the fint year and three months
of my adult life I didn't have a boyfriend. That was really stralrge cause all kinds of
people ask you, "do you have a boyfriend " Your nieces ask you, "Do you have a
boyfriend?" (slight laugh) No, I don't. Gee lhat's strange. But it's better than having
John, not having one. If they ask do you have a boyfriend, say yeah, but my boyfriend
is married to his mother. (laughs)
(laughs) That's what you say to your nieces (laughs).
(laughs) Really. Well he needs help. He doesn't know how people . . . But anyway it's
alone, alone, alone. It's different. Well, ['m comfortable with myself in that I don't fe€l
like I'djust be with somebody to be with somebody. I need to feel that way. At one point
I worried about that, you know, that I might not do that. But I have had enough chances
now that I tested that that's not true. That's a crisis som€times, loneliness. You know,
which I bave come to realize . . . it's better for me than involvement in behavior lhal I
don't like. .. (silence). .. . (sigh)
One thing Eddie mentioned that I think is wonh considering that hasn't . . a lot of my
time is spent working because I'm in a doctoral program and I do spend a lot of time
working on school and ['m concerned about my future and not even with Eddie, with
anybody. How I can incorporate a full time job with a marriage ard a family. I rea.lly
have some serious worries about what I would do to my kids with so much of my time
into my work. And I'm concemed about that. And what made me think about that was
that he mentioned tbat a lot. And I spent more time sitting down and talking with him
than I have in a long time, with anybody. I take off time here ard there, but we spenr
days together where I do a lot of talking to him and to some extent neglect my work or
save it for times when we w€ren't together and do less than I might have otherwise. I get
less sleep than I might have otherwise. So . I really wondered . . I gorra draw some
lines somewhere. I don't want have kids who have a mother who's never there for them.
(silence)
Uh huh.
Mmm.
T38:
c38:
T39:
c39
Tru^tc ipt of T he ru p! Set sio n
85
T40: The thing was tre facl that you want€d to spend time with him and there was no time to
do both him and the school work made you made you wonder about tho future in that
regard....
Czl0: (silence) Because I feel like I have some conrol over my life and I would like to plan it
in the futire so that I don't get caught in the trap of of not being there for my children.
(silence) Yeah. It really gets down to what's most imponant to me. Cause on one hand
I love to be the scholar and I love to work, and it's really hard ro give it up. But I love
to go and play and go camping and that too. But it's real hard to compromise those two
things.
I think about my childhood and my parents, and I fe€l cheated out ofsome oftheir time.
And I know they worked real hard to make money so that they could give me things.
Sometimes I just feel like it's not wonh it. I mean I feel like it's not worth it (stight
laugh). But (slight laugh) I do. I do. But I feel like those extra couple ofdays work, they,
you know, didn't have to work. They could have taken the day off. lt's tm much. So
now would be the time to starl making a change. (silence).
It's a real difference. Ifs a different kind of pressure you know, I have to make a
conscious kind of effon to put away the books and not feel guilty if I took an evening
ofl I don't fe€l that any more but . . . I surely would feel guilry if t rook a whole day and
night off. But really why I don't feel that way is because I don't.
T41: You don't . . .
C4l: I don't. I don't take that time off. I get my work done so I don't need to feel guilty.
T42: Yeah.
C42: And I am awarc that I am going to get it done. But, you know, in the context of like a
family and all, I might have this much amount of work. I'm not concemed because I am
going to get it done, but where's tlnt going to leave me in terms of time with them and
I mean (}lat's an issue I really haven'r touched upon . . . I don't know if I'm ready to deal
with it. If I can make some changes before that time comes or if I have to deal with it
before then. I don't know. Really where I'm at right now is what I'm going to do wirh
Eddie. What I feel inside. What I feel about Eddie. I feel like I resolved a whole lot about
thaL Just the whole issue about whether he is doing this for his mom. And I don't like
that. And ah . . . (silence) which is real pitiful because I lied to myself about that with
John. For a long time . . Is this going to work out? [ don't know. You know, I confused
accepting him as a penon with accepting the situation with his mom. Out of it was my
struggle to be able to accept pmple. So I really wanted to be able to accept him and long
tcrm. However crazy he was. He's a neat guy, I mean, you know. And then it hits me
thatlreallyfeel...Ireallyfeltgoodbecauselfeltlike...here'st}lisguyhe'sthirty-thre€
years old, he's got his shit together, you know. He's getting his masters degree. He's
taught and what all else and . . . I'm really excited and I do love him. I do love him. But
. . . it's like, hey I have a decision here too (slight laugb).
T43: Yeah.
C43: It's notjust him deciding about me.
Tzl4: It's the kind of thing where you are involved in it makes it makes it more than wherher
you accept him in the situation as long as your right . . . then something . . . also.
Czl4: I'm trying to understand . . . what you said . . . I . . . .
T45: I guess. . . what. . . when you said you confused your acceptance ofhim with your. . ,
with the acceptance of the situation which involved you.
C45: Yeah.
T46: I never thoughtabout that before myselfand suddenly it, you know, you accept the person
. . . You know ifyou are involved with them then if they do somehing thal involves you
I mean, then you can still accept them but. . .I don't know. Itjust struck me I can't. . .
L.
86
Doughs Bower
Czl6: Yeah
T47:...getoffofit.It'skindoflike,Imean,youcan'tyoucan't...anythingtheydocan't
be OK if i$ effecting your life in some . . .
C4'1: YeaL
T48: You know . . . funny way or something.
C48: And then here's a pan of me that wanted to convinc€ him to like me. You know, um .
...It'sjust...Tomakehimrealize,youknow,thathecan't,youknow,belikesme
too much obviously but mom gets in the way . . . to change his mind like this um . . . I
mean, I went through so much junk like that with John that eventually I realized, Gee
I've been trying to change this guy, you know. I mean to a drastic degree and and it's
finally boiling down to yeah, OK. I respect you. I accept you but we can't be together,
And it hun like hell. Yeah. Yeah. And then, you linow, I realized that I kept wanting to
say something like that to Eddie and I was real honest with him, you know. I want to say
such and such, but I'm not going to and I would either keep it to myself and not say it
or say to him, you know, well . . . Mosdy I kept it to myself and didn't say anything.
There were times when I felt like I could have sucked him into it, you know. (slight
laugh) I could have hugged him atjust tho dght moment or something . . . ,
(The tape ends at this point.)
RESEARCHER'S COMMENTS . DOUGI.AS BOWER
What I lzamed Conceming the Client
The client had concems about a man she was dating. These concerns focused upon his
relationship with his parents who forbid him from spending the night with the client. This in tum
stirred up remembrances of a former rclationship with a man who was 'married to his mother"
and could not/would not conmit himself io the client.
The client reported being bothered by the implications of her present relationship and her
boy-friend's relationship to his parents. She felt "hurt," "confused," "disappointed," "cautious,"
and others. She laugbed and she cried.
What I Leamed from the Therapist Conceming the Client
I have believed that if the therapist empathiz€s with the client, an observer should be able to
learn something about the client from the therapist's responses. I looked at the therapist's
responses to see if I could learn someth.ing. "That botheB you . . . ." "You don't like to feel its
good related to your parents to do things you really don't want to do . . . ." "You wanted to spend
time with him and there \vas no timc . . . .
I found that I did not learn a whole lot from the therapist's responses. So much for thmry.
The therapist did not respond for long periods of time. I was not sure during those periods if
the therapist rcally understood what the client was expressing and/or experiencing.
COMMENTS . CTIENT
Response to the conleflt: Itis intercsting to me that nearly nine years after this session I continue
to be challenged by the theme presented in this session. I express frustration, hurt, aad anger with
partners who make relationship detisions with an external rather dtan an intemal frame of
reference. Although I suggest that, "l don't operate like this," in relrospect I did. My goal was
not to operate like thal. Nevertheless, two years after this session, I became involved in a four
year relationship where both I and the other person connected largely because we possessed tbe
suiable external qualities of the same religion, race, age, etc.: (that our parents found most
Troruc ipt of The ropy Ses sion
acceptable- external focus). Sincethis session, I have continued to evolve my internal focus, and
therefore make decisions about my life that are much more consisrcnt with what I really value.
At the tirne of this session, my desire to act on iniernal principle is evident, but the ability hadn't
developed sufficiently to act on it, and I expected to "get it from someone else" . . . being
disappointed in them when they didn't deliver it.
Comments regarding the therapist: The therapist really seemed to care about me. I still recall
my thoughts and my feelings, my beliefs and values were fully acceptable to the therapist. The
therapist ofien seemed to be right on the edge of my awareness-very "with me." (Responses T-3,
9, 10, 14, 15, 16,22,23,24,25,27 ,32,38,40,42,43,48). I recall feeling liked by the therapist,
and ifthe memory vestiges serve me corlectly, after the session ended and I reflected back, I felt
like it was truly OK to be me.
In T-4 through T-8, the therapist was in@rested in my story. His rcmarks impressed me as a
belief that my story was important to really get stmight. He took the derails seriously, as did I
(This is important for dream worD, and I can remember thinking something like "my story is
imponant to him," and "having an accurate understarding of my story is imponanr to him."
In T-18 tkough T-19, I think the therapist got off base. T-18, it seems, missed and./or
interrupted the point thar my experiences with men haven't been positive/productive wbere
discussing the futurc is concemed, and T- l9 really divens away from my focus and may reflect
the therapist's stereotypes or own personal issues (see T-29 also), or something, but not my
experience. In T-20, he seems to be getting back on track with me.
In hindsight, I can see that in C-20, I was, esp€cially toward tbe end, attempting to clarify how
imponant it was for me to trust (be certain) that the man I arn courting possesses a clear internal
frame of reference that I can depend upon. He knows himself, communicates that, and is
trustwoflhy. Although I hardly think I was ready to abandon my desire to discuss the futue, I
think whar I was getting at was that it was less imponant for me to "talk about" the future l}lan
to have security that would come from knowing where this man really stood (and preferably on
frm, intemally sound footing). Response T-26 appears to focus on interpreting Eddie 's behavior
more than on my chagrin and confusion over Eddie's seeming changing attirude. The therapist's
response does, however, accurately convey the content of Eddie's behavior which disturbs
me...his concern about his mother's opinion. Despite the T-26 inrcrpretation, in C-26, I'm again
forging out to convince myself of this striving to unleash the bind of the mother complex.
Ijust want to mention response T-34 because I think that it is funny!
In T-t14 tkough T-48, the therapist is seeking to capture not only the desire $at I Mve torealize
my own decision with regard to Eddie, but to understand my struggle with acceptance of a man
while also recognizing that he is unsuitable for me because he cannot provide me with what I
want in a relationship. The therapist's words: ". . . any'thing they do can't be OK if it's affecting
your life in some funny way."
Final remark: My final response shows how I hoped to change Eddie to make him possess
the requisite internal focus that would obliterate his insecurity and cause him to pursue me with
his true desir€ (of course this would be a double bind for him). During this session I believed
perhaps he didn't love me enough.
It has taken me severa.l years to evolve a frame of reference that I am comfonable with for
evaluating a parmer's suitability. For Eddie, religion may have been it. As for me, I can respect
and accept his choice, but I am so glad to begin acting on my desires (seen here nearly nine years
ago) to seek a deeply enriching self directed life wi$ a man who will too be self-directed, and
to be patient enough and ready and courageous enough to wait to me€l someone who desires
growth, who is encouraged by my suppon ofhis growth, and who ca.n suppon me in my growth.
Overall, I believe that my therapist acted with moderately high to high levels of empathy, and
with very high levels ofgenuineness ard unconditional positive regard.
87
88
Douglas Bower
COMMENTS - THERAPIST
My primary observation after reading the transcript and commentary from the client is that
therc is more to person-centered therapy than that which can be observed in a written uanscript
of the verbal communication betweon client and therapist. I note that I said very little. I would
probably say even less today. A number of the few things I said were determined to bo
unimportant in content by the client during the interview or in her corunentary. Yet, tlle client
repons that she felt understood and cared for to a significant degree. I suspect this could haye
some irnplications for research and education. How important is the content of tbe therapisls
verbal behavior in and of itself?
For some reason, I found it interesting that in reading the transcdpt, I remembered word for
word some of the things the client or I said and other things that I did not remember at all.
Finally, I would like to mention a suggestion that I heard Carl Rogers make a number of times
regardhg therapist's behavior: "When in doubt, listen."
COMMENTS . JEROTD D. BOZARTH
The therapist's style is one of relatively low verbal responsiveness. The therapist is not
interventive or intrusive. The client seems to respond affrmatiyely to the therapist's comments
as well as to the relationship with the therapist. The client's responses to the therapist nearly all
affirm that the therapist has captured the essence of the communication. There does not appear
to be any presumptions by the therapist and neither is the therapist worried about making
something happen or encouraging the client to exploro any particular thing. It is, perhaps, an
extreme example ofthe client doing the work and going in her own direction and pace. A couple
ofissues raised for me are those of: ( I ) the imponance oftbe relationship which is not necessarily
represented by verbal dia.logue by the therapist, and (2) the idea that it is not what the therapist
does so mucb as what the theraDist does not do and the client does.
Policv Statement
The Person-Centered Joumal is sponsored by the Association for
Development of the Person-Centered Approach (ADPCA). The publication
is intended to promote and disseminate scholarly thinking about person-
centered principles, practices, and philosophy.
All materials contained in The Person-Centered Joumal are the property of
the ADPCA, which grants reproduction permission to libraries, researchers,
and teachers to copy all or parl of the materials in this issue for scholarly
purposes with the stipulation that no fee for profit be charged to the
consumer lor the use or possession of such copies.
